The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Flowering Plants of South Africa; vol.
3/3, by I.B. Pole Capart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Flowering Plants of South Africa; vol. 3/3

Author: I.B. Pole Capart

Release Date: November 6, 2021 [eBook #66680]

Language: English


Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             available at The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF SOUTH
AFRICA; VOL. 3/3 ***




                        THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF
                             SOUTH AFRICA.

 A MAGAZINE CONTAINING HAND-COLOURED FIGURES WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF THE
             FLOWERING PLANTS INDIGENOUS TO SOUTH AFRICA.

                               EDITED BY
            I. B. POLE EVANS, C.M.G., M.A., D.Sc., F.L.S.,

     Chief, Division of Botany and Plant Pathology, Department of
  Agriculture, Pretoria; and Director of the Botanical Survey of the
                        Union of South Africa.

                               VOL. III.

                            [Illustration]

                The veld which lies so desolate and bare
                Will blossom into cities white and fair,
                And pinnacles will pierce the desert air,
                And sparkle in the sun.
                       R. C. MACFIE’S “EX UNITATE VIRES.”

                                LONDON:
                         L. REEVE & CO., LTD.,
                  6 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

                             SOUTH AFRICA:
              THE SPECIALITY PRESS OF SOUTH AFRICA, LTD.,
         P.O. BOX 3958, JOHANNESBURG; P.O. BOX 388, CAPETOWN.
                                 1923.

                       [_All rights reserved._]




                                  TO

                      SIR FRANK UMHLALI REYNOLDS,

                                  OF

                   LYNTON HALL, UMDONI PARK, NATAL,

     WHOSE LOVE FOR GARDENING AND HORTICULTURE IS ONLY SURPASSED BY HIS
     PUBLIC SPIRITED GENEROSITY, THIS VOLUME OF THE “FLOWERING PLANTS OF
     SOUTH AFRICA” IS GRATEFULLY DEDICATED.

DIVISION OF BOTANY, PRETORIA,

_August, 1923_.

[Illustration: _81._]




PLATE 81.

CLEMATOPSIS STANLEYI.

_Transvaal. Tropical Africa._


RANUNCULACEAE. Tribe CLEMATIDEAE.

CLEMATOPSIS, _Bojer MS. ex Hutchinson in Kew Bulletin_, 1920, p. 12.


=Clematopsis Stanleyi=, _Hutchinson in Kew Bulletin_, 1920, p. 21.
CLEMATIS STANLEYI, _Harv. in Harv. and Sond. Fl. Cap._, vol. i. p. 2.

In the _Botanical Magazine_ (t. 7166) 1891, an excellent figure of this
species was given with some critical notes by Sir Joseph Hooker on the
taxonomic affinities of the species, and recently (Kew Bulletin, 1920)
Mr. J. Hutchinson dealt more fully with the group represented by our
plant. He has established Bojer’s MS. name _Clematopsis_, under which he
describes 15 species of which only _C. Stanleyi_ occurs within our
limits. The separation of _Clematopsis_ from _Clematis_ is based on the
aestivation of the sepals and for a full account of these differences
the reader is referred to Mr. Hutchinson’s article. The chief interest
in the genus is the fact that it forms a connecting link between the
tribes _Anemoneae_ and _Clematideae_, which were hitherto supposed to be
sharply demarcated. It is confined to the ancient plateau of Africa and
its continuation in Madagascar.

_Clematopsis Stanleyi_ is a fairly common plant in parts of the
Transvaal and has been recorded from the Pretoria, Witwatersrand,
Waterberg, Middleburg Districts, and it extends into Rhodesia and
Angola. In habit it is a small shrub 18 inches to 2 feet high and when
in full bloom is a very pleasing object and well worth the attention of
horticulturists. When in fruit the beauty of the plant is not entirely
lost as the long white plumose styles stand out in sharp contrast to the
surrounding vegetation.

The specimen figured here was collected by Miss S. Gower at Krugersdorp
in February 1922.

DESCRIPTION:--A small shrub 45-60 cm. high. _Branches_ ribbed, villous.
_Leaves_ opposite, 7-14 cm. long, bipinnate; the ultimate leaflets about
2 cm. long, pinnately lobed; lobes linear, acute, villous; petiole
concave above, convex beneath, villous. _Peduncle_ axillary and
terminal, 3-8 cm. long, densely villous. _Sepals_ 2 cm. long, 1·5 cm.
broad, obovate, densely villous without and within. _Filaments_ 8 mm.
long, linear, pilose; anthers 4 mm. long. _Style_ 1·2 cm. long, densely
plumose. _Fruits_ densely villous terminated by the persistent plumose
style.


PLATE 81.--Fig. 1, stamens, front and side view; Fig. 2, a single
carpel; Fig. 3, fruits with the persistent styles.

F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _82._

K. A. Lansdell del]




PLATE 82.

MIMETES HOTTENTOTICA.

_Cape Province._


PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE.

MIMETES, _Salisb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 171.


     =Mimetes hottentotica=, _Phillips et Hutchinson_, sp. nov. insignis
     et affinitate _M. saxatili_ Phill. foliis late ellipticis,
     capitulis paucis stigmate excavato differt.

     _Rami_ tomentosi et sparse villosi. _Folia_ 4·5-7·5 cm. longa,
     2·2-3·5 cm. lata, elliptica, apice tridentata, dense pubescentia
     pilis sericeis. _Capitula_ sessilia, 7·5 cm. longa, 8-12-flora,
     apice ramorum conferta. _Involucri_ bracteae 3-seriatae, 1·7-2 cm.
     longae, 3-6 mm. latae, lanceolato-ovatae, lineares, vel
     lineari-lanceolatae, obtusae vel subacutae, villosae, ciliatae.
     _Segmenta perianthii_ 3·2 cm. longa, linearia, paullo lata,
     villosa; limbus 6 mm. longus, obovatus, subacuminatus, apice
     obtusus, villosus. _Antherae_ 2·5 mm. longae, apice obtusae.
     _Squamae hypogynae_ 3 mm. longae, lineares, apice subacutae.
     _Ovarium_ 1 mm. longum, villosum; stylus 6·5 mm. longus, glaber;
     stigma 4 mm. longum, obovoideum, apice obtusum, excavatum.

     SOUTH AFRICA: Caledon Division. Hottentot’s Holland Mountains near
     Hangklip, _T. P. Stokoe in National Herbarium_, 1641.


Mr. T. P. Stokoe, to whom we are indebted for so many of the interesting
plants figured in earlier plates of this work, has again contributed two
exquisite species of _Mimetes_ which are both undescribed.
Unfortunately, it was not possible at the time to figure both plants,
but we hope to publish a figure and description of the second species in
our next volume. The genus, which is represented by nine species, falls
into two well-defined groups, (_a_) those with an ovoid stigma
(represented by _M. capitulata_, figured on Plate 58) and (_b_) those
species with a linear stigma (represented by _M. palustris_, figured on
Plate 36). Hitherto only two species of the first group were known, but
these recent acquisitions from Mr. Stokoe increases this number to four.

The species figured in the accompanying plate was found on the
Hottentot’s Holland Mountains S.E. of Kogelberg and was growing on the
banks of a steep, fairly moist slope. When fresh, it is a most beautiful
object, certainly one of the most handsome species of the genus. The
styles are bright red, white just below the stigma, and the stigma
brownish-black. It is characterised by the regular excavations on the
surface of the stigma which appear to be receptacles for the pollen
grains.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1641).

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ minutely tomentose but also sparsely
covered with long lax hairs. _Leaves_ 4·5-7·5 cm. long, 2·2-3·5 cm.
broad, elliptic, with a blunt 3-toothed callous apex, densely
adpressed-pubescent with silky hairs. _Heads_ sessile, 7·5 cm. long
including the styles, 8-12-flowered, solitary in the axils of the leaves
at the ends of the branches. _Involucral-bracts_ 3-seriate; the outer
1·7 cm. long, 6 mm. broad, lanceolate-ovate, obtuse, villous
without, long-ciliate; inner 2 cm. long, 3 mm. broad, linear or
linear-lanceolate, sub-acute, villous without, long-ciliate.
_Receptacle_ villous. _Perianth_ divided almost to the base; segments
3·2 cm. long, linear-filiform, slightly broadened at the base, villous;
limb 6 mm. long, obovate, subacuminate, obtuse, villous. _Anthers_
sessile, 2·5 mm. long, obtuse. _Hypogynous scales_ 3 mm. long, linear
subacute. _Ovary_ about 1 mm. long, hairy at base; style 6·5 mm. long,
cylindric, glabrous; stigma 4 mm. long, obovoid, obtuse, with several
depressions on the sides.

     PLATE 82.--Fig. 1, a single head; Fig. 2, bracts; Figs. 3, 4, a
     single flower; Fig. 5, perianth-segment enlarged; Fig. 6, stigma
     enlarged.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _83._

K. A. Lansdell del]




PLATE 83.

SENECIO MEDLEY-WOODII.

_Natal._

COMPOSITAE. Tribe SENECIONIDEAE.

SENECIO, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 446.

=Senecio Medley-Woodii=, _Hutchinson_, sp. nov. succulenta caule crasso,
foliis carnosis dentatis lanato-pubescentibus, capitulis speciosis
flavis distincta.

_Rami_ succulenti, purpurei, juniores lanati, demum glabri. _Folia_
sessilia, 3·5-5 cm. longa, 1·5-3 cm. lata, obovata, breviter apiculata,
basi cuneata, superne undulato-dentata, primum lanata, demum plus
minusve glabra. _Capitula_ racemoso-corymbosa, 13-14-flora, 19 cm.
longa; pedunculi ultimi 3-6 cm. longi, lanati. _Involucri bracteae_
1·2-1·5 cm. longae, 3-6 mm. latae, lanceolatae ad elliptico-ovatae,
obtusae, marginibus membranaceis, extra lanato-tomentosae.
_Receptaculum_ planum, 8 mm. latum, foveolatum. _Flores radii_ flavi;
limbus 1·5 cm. longus, 5 mm. latus, oblongus, 6-8-nervus, apice minute
tridentatus; ovarium glabrum. _Flores disci_ brunneo-flavi; pappus 1 cm.
longus; corollae tubus 1·2 cm. longus, glaber. _Achaenia_ glabra.


This is one of the shrubby species of _Senecio_ with succulent stems
found in Natal. In cultivation it makes an ornamental shrub having very
large yellow-rayed heads. The species was first collected by the late
Dr. Medley Wood at Murchison in Natal in 1884 (_Wood_ 3065), and was
brought to him from Krantzkloof in August 1915. Dr. Wood had an
illustration made for vol. vii of the “Natal Plants,” but did not draw
up a description, as specimens were sent to Kew for identification. The
present illustration was made from a specimen which flowered in the
garden of the Natal Herbarium. This species was the last which Dr.
Medley Wood worked at the day before his death.

Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No.
1604).

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ succulent, woolly when young, at length
becoming glabrous. _Leaves_ sessile, 3·5-5 cm. long, 1·5-3 cm. broad
above, obovate, shortly apiculate, cuneate at the base, with the
margins more or less undulate and sometimes toothed in the upper half,
woolly when young, at length becoming more or less glabrous.
_Inflorescence_ terminal, peduncled, 13-14-flowered, racemose-corymbose,
19cm. long; common peduncle 10 cm. long, woolly; ultimate peduncles
3-6cm. long, few-bracteate, woolly. _Bracts_ 1·5-2cm. long, linear,
obtuse, woolly. _Involucral-scales_ 1·2-1·5cm. long, 3-6 mm. broad,
lanceolate to elliptic-ovate, obtuse, with more or less membranous
margins, woolly-tomentose without. _Receptacle_ flat, 8mm. broad,
honeycombed. _Ray-flowers_ pale yellow. _Corolla-tube_ 6mm. long,
cylindric; limb 1·5cm. long, 5mm. broad, oblong, 6-8-nerved, minutely
3-toothed at the apex. _Pappus_ 9mm. long; setae very minutely
barbellate. _Ovary_ 4mm. long, linear in outline, glabrous; style 8mm.
long, cylindric, somewhat thickened at the base; lobes 2mm. long, linear
obtuse. _Disc-flowers_ brownish-yellow. _Pappus_ 1cm. long, very
minutely barbellate. _Corolla-tube_ 1·2cm. long, gradually widening
upwards, glabrous; lobes 1·5mm. long, ovate, obtuse. _Filaments_
inserted at the constricted portions of the corolla-tube, 6mm. long,
linear, slightly broadened below the anthers; anthers 4mm. long, with a
short ovate appendage, blunt at the base. _Ovary_ 4·5mm. long, linear in
outline, glabrous; style 1·1cm. long, cylindric; lobes 2mm. long, flat
on the inner face, convex on the back, truncate and shortly bristly at
the apex.

     PLATE 83.--Fig. 1, ray-flower; Fig. 2, disc-flower; Fig. 3, upper
     portion of style with lobes; Figs. 4, 5, involucral bracts; Fig. 6,
     fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _84._

S. Gower del]




PLATE 84.

PROTEA COMPACTA.

_Cape Province._

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE
PROTEA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 169.

=Protea compacta=, _R. Br. in Trans. Linn. Soc._ vol. x. 76; _Fl. Cap._
vol. v. sect. i. p. 570.


We have previously figured two species of _Protea_ belonging to
different sections of the genus. On Plate 22 will be found _P.
abyssinica_ (§ _Lasiocephalae_) with a large head not contracted into a
scaly peduncle at the base, while on Plate 76 we figured _P. recondita_
(§ _Leiocephalae_) with a smaller head and a scaly peduncle. Our present
plant belongs to quite a separate section (_Ligulatae_), which is
characterised by the inner involucral bracts being produced into a long
claw with an oblong or oblanceolate limb. _Protea compacta_ is a common
plant in some parts of the Cape Province, especially in the Caledon
Division, but is also found in parts of the Cape and Stellenbosch
Divisions, and a single specimen, collected by Zeyher, has been recorded
from the van Staden’s Mountains. In its natural habitat it is a bush 4-6
ft. high with brilliant pink bracts partly surrounded by the uppermost
leaves, and in many localities the flowering bush is one of the features
of the landscape. Like many other species of _Protea_ in the Cape
Province, this species is visited by a large coleopterous beetle.

Our plant was collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans, C.M.G., at Hawston in
the Caledon Division, where it is found growing on white sandy soil. The
species has been established in cultivation at the National Botanic
Gardens, Kirstenbosch, and is doing remarkably well there. Specimens are
preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (No. 2577).

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ finely tomentellous, at length glabrous.
_Leaves_ 3¼-4½ in. long, ¾-1½ in. broad, strongly imbricate, ovate to
ovate-lanceolate or elliptic-oblong, obtuse with a callous point,
sub-cordate or rounded or slightly narrowed at the base, coriaceous,
prominently veined, glabrous, with the margins shortly villous or at
length glabrous. _Head_ sessile, 4 in. long, about 2½ in. in diameter.
_Involucral-bracts_ 8-seriate; outer ovate, obtuse, villous-pubescent or
more or less glabrescent, with a dense fringe of woolly hairs; inner
more or less flesh-colour to carmine with an oblong limb and a linear
claw, finely villous-tomentose, tips densely ciliate, exceeding the
flowers. _Perianth-sheath_ 2 in. long, dilated, 5-nerved and 3-keeled
below, finely tomentose, glabrous at the base; lip over 1 in. long,
3-awned, lateral awns 3-4½ in. long, filiform, flexuous, tawny to
purplish-tomentose; median awn 1 in. long, filiform. _Fertile stamens_
3, sub-sessile; filaments ¾ in. long, flattened; anthers linear, 4½ in.
long; apical gland almost 1 in. long, lanceolate-oblong; barren stamen
4½ in. long, linear, eglandular. _Ovary_ 1 in. long, oblong, densely
covered with long light-golden hairs; style 2 in. long, finely grooved
on the convex side, glabrous; stigma 2½ in. long, linear, obtuse,
strongly keeled and bent at the junction with the style.

     PLATE 84.--Fig. 1, longitudinal section of receptacle; Fig. 2,
     surface view of portion of receptacle; Fig. 3, an outermost bract;
     Fig. 4, inner bract; Fig. 5, a single flower; Fig. 6, ovary and
     base of style; Fig. 7, stigma and upper part of style.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _85._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 85.

GERBERA PLANTAGINEA.

_Transvaal._

COMPOSITAE. Tribe MUTISIEAE.
GERBERA, _Gronov._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 497.

=Gerbera plantaginea=, _Harv. in Fl. Cap._ vol. ii. p. 522.


In an earlier part, on Plate 64, we figured a Transvaal plant, _Gazania
pygmaea_, and stated it to be one of the first species to flower on
burnt veld. The plant illustrated here is usually contemporary with the
above, and before any of the other veld plants show signs of growth
numerous inflorescences of _Gerbera plantaginea_ may be seen pushing
through the hard surface of the soil. The underground rootstock is well
adapted to withstand the long, dry winter months, and can store up
sufficient moisture to commence growth before the first summer rains
begin. The plant is usually found growing in small colonies, and the
colour of the ray-florets varies from pure white to yellow and through
various shades of pink to red. Like _Gazania pygmaea_, this species was
found by Burke and Zeyher on the Magaliesberg about the year 1841, and
Harvey, in the “Flora Capensis,” based his description on their
specimen. We are indebted to Mr. D. Fouche for the specimens which were
collected near Meintjes Kopje, Pretoria. They are preserved in the
National Herbarium, Pretoria (Herb. No. 2580).

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent plant with an underground rhizome with a
woolly crown and thick cylindric roots. _Leaves_ 4·5-13cm. long,
0·8-2·2cm. broad, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, subacute, narrowed
into a petiole at the base, with the midrib and lateral veins distinct
beneath, and with entire or sub-denticulate margins, pilose above and
beneath. _Peduncle_ 11-27cm. long, naked, densely tomentose, at length
becoming sparsely tomentose. _Heads_ solitary, 3-4cm. in diameter.
_Involucral-bracts_ in 3 rows, all tomentose; the outer 7 mm. long, 1·5
mm. broad at the base, tapering to an acute point; the inner 1 cm. long,
2 mm. broad, lanceolate, acuminate, acute. _Receptacle_ slightly convex,
honeycombed. _Ray-flowers_ in two rows; the outer with a strap-shaped
limb 1 cm. long, 2·5 mm. broad, about 6-nerved, minutely 2-3-toothed at
the apex and with the lower lip represented by 4 linear appendages 1·5-2
mm. long, the two outer narrower than the two inner. _Pappus_ 6 mm.
long, longer than the tube. _Ovary_ 3 mm. long, oblong, pilose; style 8
mm. long, cylindric; lobes 0·5 mm. long, glandular (lobes sometimes
three); inner ray-flowers similar to the outer but limb 4·5 mm. long,
0·75 mm. broad. _Disc-flowers_ hermaphrodite. _Corolla-tube_ 4·5 mm.
long, cylindric; lobes 3 mm. long, 0·5 mm. broad, linear, obtuse.
_Anthers_ 5 mm. long, linear, obtuse, long-tailed at the base. _Pappus_
6 mm. long. _Ovary_ 3 mm. long, terete, almost glabrous; style 6 mm.
long, cylindric; lobes 0·5 mm. long, ovate, obtuse.

     PLATE 85.--Fig. 1, longitudinal section through head showing the
     convex receptacle; Fig. 2, a ray-floret; Fig. 3, a disc-floret;
     Fig. 4, upper portion of corolla of disc-floret; Fig. 5, apices of
     lips of disc-floret; Fig. 6, stamens; Fig. 7, upper portion of
     style of disc-floret showing the two lobes.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _86._]




PLATE 86.

ALOE VARIEGATA.

_Cape Province._

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.
ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

=Aloe variegata=, _Linn. Sp. Pl._ vol. i. p. 321; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 328.


The _Aloe_ here represented differs from any we have previously
illustrated by having the leaves arranged in three ranks which may
become spirally twisted. In the “Flora Capensis” this character is used
to distinguish a sub-genus “Gonialoe” which contains only the species
_A. variegata_. The species is one of the oldest and most common aloes
in cultivation. A coloured illustration appeared in the _Botanical
Magazine_ (t. 513) in 1801, and it is recorded that a Mr. Fairchild had
the species growing in England in 1720. For some reason the plant is not
well represented in European herbaria, as even in 1897, when the genus
was published in the “Flora Capensis,” the precise localities in which
the species occurs in South Africa remained doubtful. The traveller and
botanist, Carl Thunberg, collected the plant about 1772, and according
to Mr. N. E. Brown it is represented in the Thunberg herbarium by “two
leaves with the variegation on them well preserved, and a single
flower.”

The species is easy of cultivation and is propagated by means of suckers
which send up small plants. From the plant in cultivation at Pretoria,
four offshoots have developed in one season.

We are enabled to figure this plant through the courtesy of Mrs. E.
Rood, of Van Rhynsdorp, who forwarded us the living plant, which
flowered at Pretoria in July 1922. Specimens are preserved in the
National Herbarium, Pretoria (No. 2575).

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent plant. _Leaves_ in three rows sometimes
slightly spirally twisted, with irregular greenish-white bands on a
dark green background; the lower leaves 8-10 cm. long, about 3·5 cm.
broad, ovate, mucronate, almost flat above, keeled beneath, rough with
small tubercles on the keel and margins; the inner leaves 14-23 cm.
long, ovate-lanceolate, mucronate, concave on the inner face, keeled
beneath, rough with small tubercles on the keel and margins.
_Inflorescence_ from the axil of one of the lower leaves; peduncle 40
cm. long, 9 mm. in diameter, terete, with about 8 barren bracts below
the flowers which occupy the uppermost 11 cm. of the peduncle. _Flowers_
at first erect, then horizontal, then pendulous when mature. _Bracts_
1·2 cm. long, 6 mm. broad, long-acuminate, acute, longer than the
pedicels, white, with a greenish-brown keel. _Pedicels_ 5 mm. long,
terete, glabrous. _Perianth-tube_ 4 cm. long, 9 mm. in diameter,
tubular, slightly ventricose and oblique at the base; lobes 9 mm. long,
5 mm. broad, obovate. _Stamens_ attached to the base of the perianth;
filaments 4·5 cm. long, terete; anthers 2·5 mm. long, oblong. _Ovary_ 6
mm. long, 3 mm. in diameter, ellipsoid; style 4 cm. long, terete; stigma
minutely 3-lobed.

     PLATE 86.--Fig. 1, bract; Fig. 2, bud; Fig. 3, mature flower; Fig.
     4, upper part of perianth laid open; Fig. 5, stamen; Fig. 6,
     pistil; Fig. 7, cross-section of leaf. N.B.--In the coloured
     drawing the leaves are half natural size, but the inflorescence is
     natural size.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _87._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 87.

CERATOTHECA TRILOBA.

_Bechuanaland_, _Cape Province_, _Natal_, _Transvaal_.

PEDALLACEAE. Tribe SESAMEAE.
CERATOTHECA, _Endl._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 1059.

=Ceratotheca triloba=, _E. Mey. ex Bernh. in Linnaea_, vol. xvi. 29;
_Fl. Cap._ vol. iv. sect. ii. p. 462.


The genus _Ceratotheca_, of which there are five species known, is
confined to Africa, but the species figured in the accompanying plate is
the only one recorded in South Africa. The genus is closely related to
_Sesamum_, only differing by the capsule having two divergent horns or
spines at the apex instead of being acute or beaked as in the latter
genus. The species was first described in 1842 under the name
_Sporledera triloba_, but, as pointed out in the _Botanical Magazine_
under Tab. 6974, there is no justification for establishing a genus to
include this species separate from _Ceratotheca_. The oldest record from
South Africa appears to be specimens collected by Drège between the
Umtata and St. John’s River, but since then it has been found by
numerous collectors. When fresh, the leaves have a very objectionable
odour. The plant is very common during January on the hills at
Wonderboom, near Pretoria. Our specimen was collected by Dr. R. Reitz.
Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (No. 1605).

DESCRIPTION:--An herbaceous plant with erect stems, sometimes 6 ft.
high, simple or branched. _Stems_ obtusely 4-angled, glandular-pilose.
_Leaves_ opposite, sometimes alternate, petiolate; petioles 0·5-5 cm.
long, grooved above, convex beneath, glandular-pilose; lamina 2-6·5 cm.
long, ovate, more or less 3-lobed with the lobes crenate (the uppermost
leaves not lobed), cordate at the base, palmately veined, with the veins
prominent beneath, depressed above, glandular-pubescent. _Flowers_
solitary, axillary, with often two abortive flowers in the same
leaf-axil. _Pedicels_ 5 mm. long, terete, glandular-pilose. _Calyx_
divided almost to the base; the lobes erect, 0·8-1 cm. long, lanceolate,
acuminate, sub-obtuse, glandular-pilose; the anterior lobe the smallest.
_Corolla-tube_ 3·5 cm. long, ventricose at the base, then slightly
constricted and widening into a broad campanulate portion 1·4 cm.
diameter, glandular-pilose; lobes 0·8 cm. long, about 1 cm. broad,
transversely oblong, rounded above; the posterior lobe longer. _Stamens_
of two different lengths, inserted above the ventricose portion of the
corolla-tube; filaments 0·9-1·3 cm. long, glabrous; anthers 5 mm. long,
linear. _Ovary_ 6 mm. long, oblong in outline, densely villous, with 2
divergent horns at the apex; style 1·8 cm. long, terete, glabrous;
stigmas recurved, papillose. _Fruit_ 2 cm. long, oblong, with 2
divergent horns, glandular-pilose.

     PLATE 87.--Fig. 1, portion of flowering branch; Fig. 2, corolla
     laid open; Fig. 3, pistil; Fig. 4, cross-section of ovary; Fig. 5,
     stigmas; Fig. 6, stamens and anther; Fig. 7, fruits; Fig. 8, fruit
     dehisced; Fig. 9, leaf; Figs. 10, 11, abortive flowers.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _88._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 88.

DICOMA ZEYHERI.

_Transvaal. Zululand._

COMPOSITAE. Tribe MUTISIEAE.
DICOMA, _Cass._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 492.

=Dicoma Zeyheri=, _Cass. in Linn._ vol. xxiii. p. 71; _Fl. Cap._ vol.
iii. p. 518.


The genus _Dicoma_ comprises a small group of half-woody shrubs with
acuminate usually pungent involucral-bracts. About twenty-five species
are known, most of which are found in Tropical and South Africa, one
extending into Western India. There is also a peculiar species, _D.
cana_, in the island of Socotra. The tribe _Mutisieae_, to which
_Dicoma_ belongs, is but sparingly represented in Africa and has its
head-quarters in South America.

Our present plant is common in parts of the Transvaal Highveld, and is
found in flower from January to March. It has also been collected at
Barberton by Mr. E. E. Galpin. Like so many of the shrubby plants
occurring in the grass-veld, it has deep underground roots from which
the stems arise, but, unlike the majority of them, is one of the last to
flower.

The specimen from which this plate was prepared was collected by Miss S.
Gower near the Botanical Laboratories, Pretoria. Specimens are preserved
in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (No. 2581).

DESCRIPTION:--A somewhat woody undershrub about 30 cm. high with deep
underground roots. _Stems_ striate, cobwebby. _Leaves_ 5·5-7 cm. long,
1-1·7 cm. broad, lanceolate, acute, or obtuse, sometimes subacuminate,
slightly broadened and half-clasping at the base, usually entire, more
rarely minutely and remotely toothed, glabrous above, cobwebby beneath.
_Capitulum_ shortly peduncled, about 5 cm. in diameter when expanded.
_Involucral-bracts_ in about 8 rows, the outermost strongly reflexed,
the rest erect spreading, 1·5-2·5 cm. long, 4-9 mm. broad, ovate,
acuminate, pungent, with membranous margins (except the outermost); the
innermost bracts erect, closely enveloping the flowers, almost wholly
membranous. _Involucre_ 1·5 cm. in diameter, slightly convex, deeply
honeycombed. _Flowers_ all hermaphrodite. _Corolla-tube_ 6 mm. long,
cylindric for 5 mm. then suddenly campanulate, glabrous; lobes 4·5 mm.
long, linear, gradually tapering upwards, obtuse, recurved in open
flowers. _Stamens_ inserted at the widened portion of the corolla-tube;
filaments 1·5 mm. long, linear; anthers 7·5 mm. long, linear,
lanceolate, acute at the apex, long-tailed at the base; tails hairy with
ascending hairs. _Ovary_ densely villous; style 1·5 cm. long, cylindric,
glabrous; lobes 0·5 mm. long, ovate, obtuse, convex and hairy on outer
side. _Pappus_ 9 mm. long, dense and completely hiding the corolla-tube;
setae long, plumose.

     PLATE 88.--Fig. 1, longitudinal section of head; Fig. 2, surface
     view of part of receptacle; Fig. 3, involucral-bract; Fig. 4, an
     inner involucral-bract; Fig. 5, disc-floret before style appears;
     Fig. 6, disc-floret with style through the stamens; Fig. 7,
     disc-floret with pappus removed; Fig. 8, stamen; Fig. 9, apex of
     style; Fig. 10, a single pappus bristle; Fig. 11, portion of a leaf
     showing the minute teeth on the margin.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _89._

K A Lansdell del]




PLATE 89.

HYOBANCHE FULLERI.

_Natal._

SCROPHULARIACEAE. Tribe GERARDIEAE.
HYOBANCHE, _Thunb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 968.

     =Hyobanche Fulleri=, _Phillips_, sp. nov. _Stipes_ succulentus.
     _Folia_ 1·4 cm. longa, superne 6 mm. lata, spathulata, apice
     obtusa, externe glanduloso-villosa. _Inflorescentia_ ad 13 cm.
     longa, 3 cm. lata. _Bracteae_ 2·5 cm. longae, superne 6 mm. latae,
     spathulatae, externe glanduloso-pilosae, 3-nervosae; bracteolae 2,
     2·5 cm. longae, 2 mm. latae, lineares, apice subacutae.
     _Pedicellus_ 3 mm. longus, 3 mm. latus, carnosus. _Calyx_
     inaequalis; segmentum infimum 3 mm. longum, lineare; cetera 2·5 cm.
     longa, pilosa. _Corolla_ leviter curvata, 3·5 cm. longa, 7 mm.
     lata, superne viscido-pilosa. _Filimenta_ 2·4 cm. longa. _Ovarium_
     4 mm. longum, globosum, glabrum; stylus 2·7 cm. longus, superne
     curvatus; stigma clavatum.


This new _Hyobanche_ is the only recorded species for Natal. Bews
(“Flora of Natal and Zululand”) records _H. sanguinea_ from Umzumbi, but
we suspect it is the species here described. It was first collected by
the late Dr. J. Medley Wood (Herb. Natal 11002) at Karridene Beach, and
recently Mr. Claude Fuller of Pretoria forwarded living specimens from
the same locality. Mr. Fuller was unable to determine the host on which
the parasite grew. It differs from _H. sanguinea_, as from all the other
known South African species, in having the lowest calyx segment very
much shorter than the others. The genus _Hyobanche_ is very closely
related to _Harveya_, a species (_Harveya squamosa_) of which is figured
on Plate 67. Species of the two genera can easily be distinguished by an
examination of the stamens. In _Hyobanche_ the anthers are one-celled,
while in _Harveya_ the anthers are two-celled but only one cell contains
pollen. Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria
(Herb. No. 1643).

DESCRIPTION:--A parasitic herb. _Stem_ fleshy. _Leaves_ adpressed, 1·4
cm. long, 6 mm. broad above, spathulate, obtuse, glandular-villous
without. _Inflorescence_ up to 13 cm. long, 3 cm. in diameter; axis
fleshy. _Bracts_ 2·5 cm. long, 0·6 cm. broad above, spathulate, densely
glandular-pilose without, 3-nerved above; bracteoles 2, 2·5 cm. long, 2
mm. broad, linear, subacute, narrowing at the base. _Pedicels_ 3 mm.
long, 3 mm. in diameter, fleshy. _Calyx_ unequal; the anterior segment 3
mm. long, linear; the lateral and posterior segments 2·5 cm. long,
pilose without. _Corolla_ slightly curved, 3·5 cm. long, 7 mm. in
diameter, viscously pilose without in the upper half; mouth a
longitudinal slit, about 1 cm. long, more or less opening out upwards by
a recurving of the margins which indicates the presence of a hooded
faintly two-lobed upper lip and a very obscure lower lip split to the
base. _Filaments_ 2·4 cm. long, attached near base of corolla-tube.
_Ovary_ 4 mm. long, 4 mm. in diameter, globose, glabrous; style 2·7 cm.
long, terete, gradually thickening and sharply curved above, glabrous;
stigma clavate.

     PLATE 89.--Fig. 1, young inflorescence; Fig. 2, longitudinal
     section of inflorescence; Fig. 3, underground stem with young
     inflorescence; Fig. 4, flower, with bract and two bracteoles; Fig.
     5, bract, front and side view; Fig. 6, calyx; Fig. 7, bracteole;
     Fig. 8, corolla; Fig. 9, gynæcium; Fig. 10, leaf; Fig. 11, upper
     portion of corolla, side view; Fig. 12, upper portion of corolla,
     front view.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration _90._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 90.

ROMULEA AUSTINII.

_Cape Province._

IRIDACEAE. Tribe SISYRINCHIEAE.

ROMULEA, _Maratti_; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 695.

     =Romulea Austinii=, _Phillips_, sp. nov.; affinis _R. hirsutae_,
     Eck., sed floribus aurantiacis, bractea interior marginibus latis
     membranaceis differt.

     _Cormi_ 1·5 cm. longi, 1·2 cm. diametro, tunicis brunneis obtecti.
     _Folia_ 3 vel 4, lineari-filiformia, acuta, 4-10 cm. longa, 0·75
     mm. lata, profunde sulcata, basi vaginata. _Flores_ 2-3-nati;
     pedicelli 1·2 cm. longi, subteretes, glabri, demum spiraliter
     curvati. _Valva_ exterior elliptico-oblonga, herbacea, apice
     dentata, 9 mm. longa, 4 mm. lata, 9-nervia, marginibus angustis
     membranaceis, interior subaequalis, apice bifida, 5-6-nervia,
     marginibus latissime membranaceis. _Perianthii tubus_ campanulatus,
     5-6 mm. longus, lobis 1·5 cm. longis 0·7 cm. latis obovatis obtusis
     interioribus aurantiacis exterioribus purpureo notatis. _Filamenta_
     9 mm. longa, basi explanata et pilosa, medio dorso pilosa; antherae
     4 mm. longae, 2 mm. latae, ellipsoideae, primum leviter connatae.
     _Ovarium_ subglobosum; stylus 1 cm. longus, teres, glaber, ramis
     3·5 mm. longis bifidis.

     SOUTH AFRICA: Matjesfontein, _A. J. Austin_.


We are indebted to Mr. A. J. Austin for this charming little species of
_Romulea_, which is apparently undescribed. It was gathered at
Matjesfontein. The same species was collected a few years ago by
Schlechter (No. 8847) at Matjes River at an altitude of 2500 feet, and
distributed by him as _Romulea hirsuta_, Eckl., var. _aurantiaca_.
Although resembling _R. hirsuta_ in general appearance, it is easily
distinguished by the colour of the flowers and especially by the very
broadly membranous margins of the inner spathe valve. The flowers close
up at night.

Our knowledge of the genus _Romulea_ in South Africa is still very
meagre, and much field-work is necessary in order to understand the
range and variability of the species.

DESCRIPTION:--_Corms_ 1·5 cm. long, 1·2 cm. in diameter with brown
tunics. _Leaves_ 3-4 to a corm, 4-10 cm. long, 0·75 mm. broad, with five
deep and narrow grooves, acute, somewhat sheathing at the base and
forming a distinct neck, minutely ciliate. _Flowers_ 2-3 to a spathe.
_Pedicels_ 1·2 cm. long, subterete, glabrous, becoming spirally coiled
in old flowers. _Outer spathe valve_ 9 mm. long, 4 mm. broad,
elliptic-oblong, toothed at the apex, 9-nerved, with membranous margins;
inner spathe valve about same size as outer, deeply bifid at the apex,
5-6-nerved with very broad membranous margins. _Perianth-tube_ 5-6 mm.
long, campanulate; lobes 1·5 cm. long, 0·7 cm. broad, obovate, obtuse,
reflexed in the open flower, yellow in colour with a spade-like purple
mark on the three outer and smaller purple marks on the three inner.
_Filaments_ 9 mm. long, convex on the back, grooved on the front face,
broadened and pilose at the base, pilose on back about the middle;
anthers 4 mm. long, 2 mm. broad, elliptic, in flowers which have just
opened the anthers are somewhat joined and the stigmas appear between
the anthers. Ovary subglobose; style 1 cm. long, terete, glabrous; lobes
3·5 mm. long, each subdivided into 2 lobes 2 mm. long.

     PLATE 90.--Fig. 1, leaf; Fig. 1_a_, section of leaf; Fig. 2, spathe
     valve; Fig. 3, perianth from outside; Fig. 4, same from above; Fig.
     5, section of flower; Fig. 6, stamen; Fig. 7, base of filament;
     Fig. 8, anther (front); Fig. 9, anther (back); Fig. 10, style; Fig.
     11, inner valve.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _91._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 91.

LACHENALIA ROODEAE.

_Cape Province._

LILIACEAE. Tribe SCILLEAE.

LACHENALIA, _Jacq._; _Benth. et Hook. f._ vol. iii. p. 807.

     =Lachenalia Roodeae=, _Phillips_, sp. nov.

     _Bulbus_ 2·5 cm. longus, 1·8 cm. latus. _Folia_ 2, 7-14 cm. longa,
     basi 2-4 cm. lata, ovato-lanceolata, apice obtusa, aliquando
     mucronata, glabra. _Pedunculus_ 2-3·5 cm. longus, c. 7 cm. latus.
     _Inflorescentia_ spicata, 9-14 cm. longa. _Bracteae_ c. 1 mm.
     longae, ovatae, apice obtusae. _Pedicellus_ c. 1 mm. longus. _Flos_
     1-1·2 cm. longus, campanulatus, basi obliquus; lobi exteriores 8
     mm. longi, 4·75 mm. lati, oblongo-ovati, apice obtusi; lobi
     interiores 1 cm. longi, 4·5 mm. lati, oblongo-obovati, apice
     rotundi. _Stamina_ exserta; filamenta 1·2 cm. longa; antherae 1·5
     mm. longae, oblongae. _Ovarium_ 3·5 mm. longum, 2·5 mm. latum,
     trigonum; stylus 1·1 cm. longus, teres; stigma minute 3-lobatum.

     Van Rhynsdorp District: Van Rhynsdorp, _Mrs. E. Rood_ in _National
     Herbarium Pretoria_, 1461.


This extremely fine species of _Lachenalia_ was sent to the Division of
Botany by Mrs. E. Rood of Van Rhynsdorp, who states that the plant is
quite common there. It belongs to an endemic South African genus of
about fifty species, and surpasses any other species known to us in the
rich colouring of the flowers. It flowers during August and September,
and should make a welcome addition to the bulb garden as one of the
earlier flowering species. There has been some doubt about the identity
of this plant, and we were inclined to regard it as _L. carnosa_, Baker,
which was collected by Drège in Little Namaqualand. Mr. N. E. Brown, of
Kew, very kindly examined the plate, and is of the opinion that it is
not this species, and that nothing like it is in the Kew Herbarium. It,
however, is very near _L. carnosa_, Baker, but may be distinguished from
this species in the inner perianth segments being longer than the outer
and in the far exserted stamens. This latter character is not constant,
as we find after examining a large series of specimens that the length
to which the stamens are exserted from the perianth depends on the age
of the flower. The stamens are in more or less two unilateral rows, the
lower three ripening before the upper three.

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 2·5 cm. long, 1·8 cm. in diameter, ovoid, covered
with black membranous tunics with many fibrous roots from the base.
_Leaves_ 2, erect-spreading, 7-14 cm. long, 2-4 cm. broad in the widest
part; the outer leaf always larger than the inner leaf,
ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, sometimes mucronate, narrowed and clasping at
the base, with reddish margins, glabrous. _Peduncle_ 2-3·5 cm. long,
about 7 mm. in diameter, partially hidden by the clasping leaf bases.
_Inflorescence_ a dense many-flowered spike, 9-14 cm. long; axis fleshy,
up to 8 cm. in diameter at the base, narrowing upwards, with a number of
facets, each facet bearing a flower at the base. _Bracts_ about 1 mm.
long, ovate, obtuse, forming a small pocket from which the flower
arises. _Flowers_ subsessile; pedicels about 1 mm. long. _Perianth_
purplish, 1-1·2 cm. long, campanulate, oblique at the base; tube about 3
mm. long, about 5 mm. in diameter above; lobes of outer segments 8 mm.
long, 4·75 mm. broad, oblong-ovate, obtuse, rostrate on the outer
surface just beneath the apex; lobes of the inner segments 1 cm. long,
4·5 mm. broad above, oblong-obovate, rounded above. _Stamens_ exserted,
attached to base of the perianth segments; filaments 1·2 cm. long,
terete; anthers 1·5 mm. long, oblong. _Ovary_ 3·5 mm. long, 2·5 mm. in
diameter, oblong in outline, trigonous; style 1·1 cm. long, terete,
stigma very faintly 3-lobed.

     PLATE 91.--Fig. 1, base of leaves; Fig. 2, axis of inflorescence
     showing the small cups in which the flowers are situated; Fig. 3, a
     single flower; Fig. 4, perianth laid open; Fig. 5, apices of outer
     perianth segments; Fig. 6, apex of an inner perianth segment. Fig.
     7, stamens; Fig. 8, pistil.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _92._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 92.

BRUNIA STOKOEI.

_Cape Province._

BRUNIACEAE.

BRUNIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 671.

=Brunia Stokoei=, _Phillips_ in _Kew Bulletin_, 1923, _ined._


This is the first occasion upon which we have had an opportunity of
figuring a member of the Natural Order _Bruniaceae_, which is one of the
endemic South African families. The _Bruniaceae_ comprise about fifty
species, all confined to the south-western portion of the Cape Province.
The genera _Brunia_ and _Berzelia_ often form a conspicuous feature in
the landscape in some areas, the spherical heads of white flowers making
the bushes noticeable amongst the surrounding vegetation.

The species figured here was collected in 1922 by Mr. T. P. Stokoe on
the Hottentot Hollands Mountains near Hang Klip, and forwarded by him to
the Division of Botany, Pretoria. Near the same locality Mr. Stokoe
discovered another species of _Brunia_, which is undescribed. We do not
know of either of these species having been previously collected, and
the fact that undescribed and rare plants have recently been found on
such a well-known mountain range as the Hottentot Hollands, proves that
there must be a large area, within easy reach of Cape Town, which has
not yet been thoroughly botanically explored.

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ glabrous. _Leaves_ spreading 7-8 mm. long, 1
mm. broad, trigonous, almost flat above with a raised mid-rib, keeled
beneath, obtuse, tipped with a small black globose mucro, the angles of
the leaves when viewed by transmitted light are pellucid, glabrous.
_Inflorescence_ a stalked globose head arranged in groups up the
branches. _Peduncles_ 2-3 cm. long, 5-7 mm. in diameter, surrounded by
adpressed imbricated bracts 3 mm. long, 1 mm. broad, lanceolate, obtuse,
keeled below, glabrous. _Axis_ of inflorescence 1·2-1·5 cm. long, 7-9
mm. in diameter, more or less ovate in longitudinal section.
_Floral-bracts_ 7 mm. long, obovate-spathulate, subacuminate, tipped
with a black mucro, bent almost at right angles above, densely villous
on back in the middle third. _Calyx_ of 4 sepals, 4·5 mm. long; 3 sepals
narrow-linear, the fourth oblanceolate, all densely villous without.
_Petals_ 5·5 mm. long, ·75 mm. broad, linear, with one large middle lobe
and two small or almost obsolete side lobes. _Filaments_ 5 mm. long,
terete; anthers 1·25 mm. long, linear. _Ovary_ 2 mm. long, 1 mm. in
diameter, ellipsoid, densely villous above, 2-celled, with a pendulous
ovule in each cell; styles two, 4 mm. long, terete, free from the base;
stigma simple (in some flowers examined there was only a single style).
_Immature fruit_ 3·5 mm. long, 1·5 mm. in diameter, ellipsoid (National
Herb. Pretoria 1668).

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 92.--Fig. 1, longitudinal section through head showing axis
     of the inflorescence; Fig. 2, floral bract; Fig. 3, a single
     flower; Fig. 4, a stamen; Fig. 5, longitudinal section of ovary
     showing the two cells and pendulous ovules.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: 93.

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 93.

HOODIA BAINII.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

ASCLEPIADACEAE. Tribe STAPELIEAE.

HOODIA, _Sweet._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 783.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Hoodia Bainii=, _Dyer in Bot. Mag._ t. 6348; _Fl. Cap_. vol. iv. sect. i.
p. 897.

       *       *       *       *       *

This plant, although previously figured in botanical publications, has
been thought worthy of another illustration, especially as the former
figures are not generally available to cultivators of South African
succulents.

The first species of this interesting genus was brought to the notice of
botanists in 1874 by Sir Henry Barkly, who sent specimens to Kew, where
it flowered the following year. Since then other species have come to
light, and we now know of seven species of the genus occurring in the
desert regions of the Cape Province and Namaqualand.

The specimen figured was collected by Mrs. D. van der Bijl,
Kruidfontein, Fraserburg District, in 1921, and sent to the Division of
Botany, where it flowered in September 1922. The plant sends up numerous
stems 9-12 inches high, and on these flowers profusely. The flowers are
martius yellow (Ridgway Colour Standards) in colour, with a dark corona
standing out in sharp relief in the middle of the saucer-shaped corolla.
Like many other members of this group of plants, the flowers have a
disagreeable odour.

DESCRIPTION:--Plant 6-8 in. high in the specimens seen (12-15 in.
according to Barkly), bushily branched; branches 1-1½ in. thick, with
12-15 tuberculate angles, glabrous, green, somewhat glaucous; tubercles
tipped with a slender pale brown spine 3½-5 in. long; flowers 1-2
together, glabrous in all parts; pedicels ¼-½ in. long; sepals 2-2½ in.
long, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate; corolla in bud hemispheric at the
basal part, 5-winged above, truncate, with a short central point, when
expanded 2½-3 in. in diameter, cup-shaped, about 1 in. deep, subtruncate
at the margin with 5 subulate or awn-like points 1½-3 in. long,
glabrous, smooth, not papillate on the central part, light yellow or
pale buff, sometimes tinged with pinkish or very pale purple; tube
obsolete, represented by a slight depression from which the blackish
corona is exserted or its margins resting upon the rim, when dried
contained in a very small cup; outer corona 1¾-2 in. in diameter,
cupular, 5-lobed; lobes ¼-⅓ in. long, nearly 1 in. broad, emarginate;
inner corona-lobes ⅖ in. long, oblong, obtuse, closely incumbent upon
the backs of the anthers and not exceeding them, dorsally connected to
the inflexed sinuses of the outer corona; follicles 4-5 in. long, 4-5
in. thick, terete-fusiform, tapering to a beak, glabrous, smooth; seeds
3-3½ in. long, 1½ in. broad, ovate, flat, with a slightly thickened
margin, glabrous, smooth, light brown. _Flora Capensis_ (National Herb.
Pretoria 2592).

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 93.--Fig. 1, bud; Fig. 2, transverse section of stem; Fig. 3,
     corona; Fig. 4, pollinia.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: 94.

M. Page del.]




PLATE 94.

TRITONIA MATHEWSIANA.

_Transvaal._

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.
TRITONIA, _Ker._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant_. vol. iii. p. 708.

=Tritonia Mathewsiana=, _L. Bolus in Annals Bolus Herb_. vol. iii. p. 76.


This species, which belongs to one of the large South African genera of
the iris family, differs from all genera of _Iridaceae_ hitherto figured
in this publication in having small brown spathe valves. The genus is
represented in South Africa by over thirty species, mostly confined to
the coastal region of the Cape Province, but with a few in Namaqualand,
Natal, and the Transvaal. _Tritonia lineata_ is the most widely
distributed species of the genus, occurring in the Mossel Bay, Bathurst,
Albany, Stockenstroom, and Somerset East Divisions, and extending into
East Griqualand, Basutoland, and Natal.

The species here figured is a new record for the Transvaal, and was
found by Mrs. H. M. Wood at Graskop, Pilgrim’s Rest. Plants were sent to
the National Botanic Gardens, Kirstenbosch, and flowered there during
February of the years 1918-1921 (National Botanic Gardens, No. 542/16).
An illustration was made from these specimens and kindly lent to us by
the Curator of the Bolus Herbarium for reproduction.

DESCRIPTION:--An erect glabrous plant 1·5 mm. or more high. _Leaves_
ascending or almost erect, 35 cm. long, 4 cm. broad, ensiform, with
about 13 primary nerves; radical leaves about 4; cauline leaves about
10. _Peduncle_ up to 15 cm. long clasped by the uppermost leaf which is
reduced to 6 cm. long. _Inflorescence_ racemose with the branches
divaricate and the flowering axis flexuose, moderately dense with the
flowers secund, at length perpendicular to the axis. _Bracts_ 3-5 mm.
long, oblong, acute, the younger herbaceous; bracteoles almost joined
to their apices, acute, equalling the bracts. _Perianth_ 3-3·5 cm. long;
tube 1·8 cm. long, 1·5 mm. in diameter at the base, 5 mm. in diameter
above, infundibuliform; segments at length spreading, ovate-oblong,
obtuse; the outer 1·3 cm. long, 5 mm. broad; the inner 1·5 cm. long, 6
mm. broad; the uppermost 1·7 cm. long, 7 mm. broad. _Stamens_ more or
less curved; filaments 1·3 cm. long; anthers 5-7 mm. long. _Style_ 2·3
cm. long; branches 5 mm. long. _Capsule_ 8 mm. long, subglobose,
obtusely 3-angled. _Seeds_ many, 4 mm. long, subtriangular.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 94.--Fig. 1, whole plant (reduced); Fig. 2, flower laid open;
     Fig. 3, fruit; Fig. 4, seed × 2.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: 95.

K. A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 95.

LEUCOSPERMUM CORDATUM.

_Cape Province._


PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE.

LEUCOSPERMUM, _R. Br._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant_. vol. iii. p. 170.


=Leucospermum cordatum=, _Phillips_ in _Kew Bulletin_, 1923, _ined._

Although the South African _Proteaceae_ are usually conspicuous plants
and have been recently monographed in the _Flora Capensis_, undescribed
species continue to be discovered. This is the case with the plant here
figured, which was collected in November 1922 by Mr. T. P. Stokoe near
Kogel Bai, on the Hottentots Holland Mountains at an altitude of 2500
ft.

Mr. Stokoe describes it as a plant of straggling growth among loose
stones and grass. We have previously figured a species of this genus
(Plate 74), and readers are referred to the description there for the
principal differences between the genera _Protea_ and _Leucospermum_.

The decumbent habit of this species is also found in _Leucospermum
hypophyllum_, but is not common in the family.

Our plate was prepared from fresh plants forwarded by Mr. Stokoe.

DESCRIPTION:--A decumbent plant with long trailing branches. _Branches_
scantily pilose with long hairs. _Leaves_ more or less horizontal or
slightly reflexed, 3-5 cm. long, 1·8-2·2 cm. broad at the base, ovate,
obtuse with a blunt callus, cordate at the base, pilose and shortly
tomentose especially near the base, at length becoming glabrous. _Heads_
solitary, very rarely 3-nate at the ends of the branches, 3-4 cm. in
diameter, semiglobose. _Peduncle_ 2 cm. long, covered with numerous
barren bracts, tomentose. _Bracts_ 5 mm. long, 3 mm. broad, at the base,
ovate, obtuse, sometimes reflexed, pilose outside, glabrous within,
ciliate. _Receptacle_ 7 mm. long, 5 mm. in diameter at the base,
conical. _Floral-bracts_ 1 cm. long, obovate, shortly awned, attenuate
at the base, densely villous outside, glabrous within, ciliate.
_Perianth-tube_ 5 mm. long, tubular; lobes 9 mm. long, linear, long
pilose; limb 3 mm. long, elliptic, subacuminate, sub-obtuse, pilose
without. _Anthers_ 2 mm. long, linear. _Ovary_ 2·5 mm. long, ellipsoid,
glabrous; style 1·7 cm. long, terete, glabrous; stigma 1·7 mm. long,
conical, shortly subacuminate, swollen at the junction with the style
(National Herb. Pretoria 2607).

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 95.--Fig. 1, flower; Fig. 2, flower showing perianth lobes;
     Fig. 3, floral bract; Fig. 4, style and stigma; Fig. 5,
     longitudinal section of receptacle.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: 96.]




PLATE 96.

ALOE SAPONARIA.

_Cape Province, Natal, Transvaal._


LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.


=Aloe saponaria=, _Haw. Syn._ 83; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 312.

This Aloe, known as the common soap-aloe, was introduced into
cultivation in Europe early in the eighteenth century, and it still
retains its popularity. Three colour varieties are known: one with
salmon-coloured flowers, one with red flowers, and one with pale
lemon-yellow flowers. The inflorescence in all these varieties may be
either simple or branched. The plants are common on the south and east
coasts of South Africa.

The buds just before the flowers open are between 3 and 4 cm. long, and
in about four days are completely open, and then a little over 4 cm.
long. The stamens do not all ripen at the same time; two or three
project and shed their pollen, being followed after a short interval by
the remainder. While the stamens are dehiscing the style remains within
the perianth and lengthens only after the pollen has been shed. It then
projects beyond the perianth, which now begins to wither and close
tightly round the style. While this is taking place the filaments
contract by twisting and are drawn back into the perianth. The inclusion
of the style during the dehiscence of the anthers and its subsequent
projection ensures cross-pollination.

Our plate was prepared from specimens growing in the Aloe collection at
the Division of Botany, Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent plant or with a short stem with a rosette
of leaves. _Leaves_ up to 20 cm. long, about 8 cm. broad, dark green
with dark longitudinal marking on the upper surface, lighter green and
faintly spotted beneath, acuminate, usually brown and withered at the
tip, with spines on the margins; spines 8 mm. long, about 1·5 cm. apart
and more or less at right angles to the leaf. _Inflorescence_ ·3-·5 m.
high, simple or branched. _Peduncle_ terete with a few dry membranous
acuminate bracts. Flowers in a contracted raceme. _Floral bracts_
1·5-2·5 cm. long, long-acuminate from an ovate-lanceolate base.
_Pedicels_ 2·5-4 cm. long, terete. _Perianth-tube_ 3·3 cm. long, 9 mm.
in diameter above, gradually narrowing below and dilated into a globose
base; segments 1 cm. long, ·5 cm. broad, oblong, obtuse, slightly
reflexed in the mature flower. _Filaments_ in buds 2·4 cm. long, linear,
in mature flowers lengthening to 3·5 cm. and becoming corrugated in the
upper half. _Ovary_ 8 mm. long, cylindric; style 2·5 cm. long,
cylindric, lengthening in older flowers to 3·8 cm.; stigma simple
(National Herb. Pretoria 2593).

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 96.--Fig. 1, perianth-lobes; Fig. 2, stamens; Fig. 3, pistil;
     Fig. 4, tip of style, much enlarged.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: 97.

M. Page del.]




PLATE 97.

SYNNOTIA METELERKAMPIAE.

_Cape Province._


IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

SYNNOTIA, _Sweet._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.


=Synnotia Metelerkampiae=, _L. Bolus_ in _Annals Bolus Herb._ vol. iii. p. 77.

The genus _Synnotia_ is one of the endemic genera of the family
_Iridaceae_, and has hitherto only been represented by two species. The
species here figured is a new record for the genus in South Africa. On
Plate 60 we figured a species of _Sparaxis_, and a comparison of that
plate with the present one will show that the two genera _Sparaxis_ and
_Synnotia_ are nearly related: the rootstock, inflorescence, and spathe
valves are the same in both, but the former has regular flowers, while
in the latter genus the flowers are irregular.

The species is found near Eendekuil in the Clanwilliam Division, and the
original description was prepared from specimens flowering in the garden
of Mrs. F. Metelerkamp. We are indebted to the Curator of the Bolus
Herbarium for lending us the illustration from which the accompanying
plate was prepared.

DESCRIPTION:--A glabrous herb, 16-25 cm. high. _Corm_ 1·6 cm. long, 1·2
cm. in diameter, ovoid, with rigid tunics prominently nerved and with
the nerves reticulated. _Stem_ erect. _Leaves_ 6-7 to each stem, 5-8 cm.
long, 1-1·2 cm. broad, equitant, adscending, linear, obtuse, apiculate
or acute, with inconspicuous nerves. _Inflorescence_ racemose, laxly
9-12-flowered, with the flowers almost erect. _Bracts_ clasping,
about 2 cm. long, ovate; bracteoles united beyond the middle,
setaceous-acuminate, almost equalling the bracts. _Perianth-tube_ 4-4·5
cm. long, 1-2 mm. in diameter, oblique and expanding to 7 mm. in
diameter above; segments unequal; the lower smaller than the upper; the
outer segments 1·2 cm. long, 4-6 mm. broad, ovate-oblong, subacute; the
inner segments subclawed, obtuse, and with obscurely undulate margins;
the uppermost 1·4 cm. long, 8 mm. broad, ovate; the lower 5 mm. broad.
_Filaments_ 1·2 cm. long; anthers 3-5 mm. long, with purple pollen.
_Style_ 4·6 cm. long with spathulate branches 3 mm. long. _Capsule_ 1·5
cm. long. _Seeds_ many, 2 mm. in diameter, subglobose (Bolus Herb. Cape
Town 16039).

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 97.--Fig. 1, flower laid open; Fig. 2, capsule; Fig. 3, seed
     × 4; Fig. 4, corm.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: 98.

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 98.

CHRYSOPHYLLUM MAGALISMONTANUM.

_Transvaal._


SAPOTACEAE.

CHRYSOPHYLLUM, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 653.


=Chrysophyllum magalismontanum=, _Sond. in Linnaea_, vol. xxiii. p. 72;
_Fl. Cap._ vol. iv. sect. 1, p. 437.

The genus _Chrysophyllum_ is a small genus in South Africa, having only
three representatives, two in Natal and one in the Transvaal. The
species figured here is the common one in the Transvaal, being found all
along the rocky outcrops of the Magaliesberg range and known as “stam
vrucht,” because the fruits are borne on the old stems. The fruits,
which are oval in shape, are somewhat larger than a cherry, and are used
to make preserve. The plants flower in October and ripe fruits are
formed in January. A milky juice characteristic of all the species in
the _Sapotaceae_ is present in the plant. A member of the order,
_Mimusops balata_, Crueg, native of Guiana, yields a guttapercha
(balata).

The specimens from which our illustration was made were gathered at
Eloff’s Cutting near Pretoria by Mr. D. J. Fouche.

DESCRIPTION:--A bush. _Youngest_ branchlets rufo-tomentose, at length
becoming pubescent. _Leaves_ petioled; blades 3-9 cm. long, 1·6-4·4 cm.
broad, oblong-obovate or oblong, retuse at the apex, slightly narrowed
at the base, dark green above, rufo-tomentose beneath on young leaves,
becoming greyish tomentose on the older leaves; petiole 1 cm. long,
pubescent. _Flowers_ arising on the old wood. _Pedicels_ 2 mm. long,
rufo-tomentose. _Sepals_ unequal 2·5-3 mm. long, 2-3·5 mm. broad, ovate,
obtuse; the 3 outer longer than the 2 inner and densely rufo-tomentose.
_Corolla-tube_ 1 mm. long; lobes 2·5 mm. long, ovate, obtuse.
_Filaments_ 1·5-2 mm. long, terete, glabrous; anthers 1 mm. long, oblong
in outline. _Ovary_ 2 mm. in diameter, villous, gradually passing into
the 1·5 mm. long style; stigma terminal, simple. _Fruit_ 2·5 cm. long,
1·7 cm. in diameter, ellipsoid, dark-red when ripe (National Herb.
Pretoria 2636).

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 98.--Fig. 1, flower; Fig. 2, portion of corolla and stamens;
     Fig. 3, stamen; Fig. 4, pistil; Fig. 5, seed.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: 99.

K A Lansdell del.]




PLATE 99.

CYRTANTHUS HELICTUS.

_Cape Province._


AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLEAE.

CYRTANTHUS, _Ait._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 729.


=Cyrtanthus helictus=, _Lehm. Delect. Sem. Hort. Hamburg_. 1839, 7; _Fl.
Cap._ vol. vi. p. 226.

This species of _Cyrtanthus_ belongs to the same group as the species
figured on Plate 25 (_C. sanguineus_). The group is characterised by
having a single flower or few flowers in each umbel. Our previous
illustrations of _Cyrtanthus_ should be compared with the above two and
the present plate. _C. helictus_, which is an exceptionally graceful
representative of the genus, has not been extensively collected by
botanists, and we know of its occurrence in the Somerset East, Graaff
Reinet, Fort Beaufort, and Queenstown Divisions only. It should
certainly engage the attention of cultivators of South African plants,
as it is well worthy of a place in the bulb garden.

Our illustration was made from specimens collected by Dr. E. P. Phillips
near Fort Beaufort; these flowered at the Division of Botany in November
1922.

DESCRIPTION:--Bulb 2·7 cm. in diameter, globose, with papery tunics and
thick wrinkled roots from the base. _Leaves_ contemporary with the
flowers, about 3 to each bulb, spirally twisted, 12 cm. long, 4·5 mm.
broad, linear, obtuse, narrowed to the base, glabrous. _Peduncle_
arising at side of the leaves, 9 cm. long, but sometimes longer, terete,
glabrous. _Spathe_ valves 2·5 cm. long, acuminate from an ovate base,
membranous. _Flowers_ usually solitary. _Pedicel_ 1·2 cm. long, terete,
glabrous, shorter than the spathe-valves. _Perianth-tube_ 3 cm. long, 2
mm. in diameter, and curved at the base, widening to 1·3 cm. in diameter
at the throat; lobes 2 cm. long, 9 mm. broad, obovate, obtuse, or the
outer segments bluntly apiculate with a pendulous appendage, 5-nerved.
_Stamens_ in 2 series: the lower with filaments 1·1 cm. long; the upper
with filaments 8 mm. long, all filiform; anthers 3·5 mm. long, linear.
_Ovary_ 7 mm. long, ellipsoid, glabrous; style 5·5 cm. long; lobes 5 mm.
long, linear (National Herb. Pretoria 2634).

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 99.--Fig. 1, perianth laid open; Fig. 2, perianth lobes; Fig.
     3, upper portion of style.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: 100.

K. A. Lansdell del]




PLATE 100.

PROTEA STOKOEI.

_Cape Province._


PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE.

PROTEA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 169.

     =Protea Stokoei=, _Phillips_, sp. nov. a _P. speciosa_, Linn.,
     aristis calycis subequalibus, et pilis apice bractearum brevioribus
     differt.

     _Rami glabri_. _Folia_ 7-9 cm. longa, 3-4 cm. lata, obovata vel
     obovato-oblonga, glabra. _Capitulum_ sessile, 10-11 cm. longum, 5·5
     cm. latum. _Involucri bracteae_ 9-10-seriatae; exteriores 1·5-2 cm.
     longae, ovato-oblongae, apice rotundatae, dense pubescentes, apice
     barbatae; interiores 9 cm. longae, 2·5 cm. latae, spathulatae,
     sericeo-pubescentes, infra glabrae, apice barbatae. _Receptaculum_
     2 cm. longum, conicum. _Perianthi tubus_ 5·5 cm. longus, basi
     dilatatus; laminae 1·2 cm. longae, villosae; apice triaristatae;
     aristae laterales 1·8 cm. longae, villosae, media 1·5 cm. longa.
     _Stamina_ 8 mm. longa, linearia, apice glandibus linearibus
     instructa. _Ovarium_ pilis longis vestitum; stylus 6 cm. longus;
     stigma 6 mm. longum.

This species of _Protea_ was collected early in 1921 by Mr. T. P.
Stokoe. At the time there was some doubt about its identity, and it was
provisionally placed under _P. speciosa_. Recently we received more and
better material from the same collector, and have no hesitation in
describing it as a species allied to _P. speciosa_. It differs from this
species in having shorter tufts of hairs at the apices of the involucral
bracts and the awns of the perianth are much longer and subequal. The
species belongs to a section of the genus _Speciosae_, which is
characterised by having the inner involucral bracts fringed with long
hairs or bearded. A comparison should be made with Plates 22, 76 and 84,
which illustrate examples of other sections of the genus.

The first specimens collected by Mr. Stokoe came from an isolated krantz
on a peak directly opposite Kogelberg on the land side, and subsequently
he found specimens also on high peaks facing Kogelberg, but on the
seaward side. It probably does not occur lower than an altitude of 3000
ft. The plant is a spreading bush about 6 ft. high (not so compact as
_P. speciosa_), and grows with such moisture-loving plants as _Mimetes
hottentotica_ and _M. splendens_. The young leaves have a fringe of
longish white hairs.

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ glabrous. _Leaves_ 7-9 cm. long, 3-4 cm. broad,
obovate, obovate-oblong, more rarely elliptic-lanceolate, rounded and
slightly emarginate at the apex, slightly narrowed to the base,
leathery, with reddish margins, quite glabrous. _Head_ sessile, 10-11
cm. long, 5·5 cm. in diameter. _Involucral bracts_ 9-10-seriate; the
outermost 1·5-2 cm. long, ovate-oblong, rounded at the apex, densely
silky pubescent, ciliate with white hairs with a small tuft of brown
hairs at the apex; the innermost 9 cm. long, 2·5 cm. broad above,
spathulate, silky pubescent, except at the base, with a fringe of
dark-brown hairs at the apex about 3 mm. long. _Receptacle_ 2 cm. long,
conical. _Perianth-sheath_ 5·5 cm. long, dilated and 3-keeled below,
glabrous; lip 1·2 cm. long, shortly but densely villous, 3-awned;
lateral awns 1·8 cm. long, linear, acuminate, shortly but densely
villous, tipped with a few brown hairs; median awn 1·5 cm. long,
otherwise similar. _Stamens_ all fertile; anthers 8 mm. long, linear,
with a pink linear apical gland. _Ovary_ covered with long, golden-brown
hairs; style 6 cm. long, subterete, slightly curved, very sparsely
pilose below; stigma 6 mm. long, linear; scarcely bent at junction with
style (Type in National Herb. Pretoria, No. 2632).

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 100.--Fig. 1, receptacle; Fig. 2, complete flower; Fig. 3,
     lamina showing the three awns and stamens; Fig. 4, pistil; Fig. 5,
     apex of style and stigma.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: 101.

S Gower del.]




PLATE 101.

GREYIA RADLKOFERI

_Transvaal._

SAPINDACEAE. Tribe MELIANTHEAE.
GREYIA, _Hook. et Harv._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 1000.

=Greyia Radlkoferi=, _Szyszy. Pl. Rehmann._ vol. ii. p. 49 (1880).


An extremely ornamental shrub found in the eastern Transvaal, where it
has been recorded from Waterval Onder, ’Thlatikulu and Barberton. The
plant does quite well at Pretoria, where specimens have been planted on
Meintjes Kop behind the Union Buildings.

The genus _Greyia_, which contains only three known species, was named
in honour of Sir George Grey, K.C.B. In South Africa it has a very
limited distribution, and is interesting botanically, as there are still
some doubts as to its affinities.

In the Transvaal the plant flowers from July to October, the young
leaves appearing at the same time as the scarlet flowers. The flowers
are proterandrous, _i. e._, the pollen is shed before the pistil has
quite matured, and this makes self-pollination almost impossible.

The Cape species, _Greyia Sutherlandi_, is commonly known as “Baakhout”
or “Wild bottlebrush,” so that our plant might be appropriately named
the “Transvaal Baakhout.” The material from which our illustration was
made was gathered by Miss S. Gower on Meintjes Kop, Pretoria.

For a roller account of this interesting genus the reader is referred to
a paper by Dr. S. Schonland in the _Records of the Albany Museum_, vol.
iii. p. 40.

DESCRIPTION:--A shrub 2-5 m. high. _Branches_ with light-brown bark,
glabrous. _Leaves_ at the apex of the branches at the side of the
flowers; blade 3·5-12 cm. long, ovate, subacute, cordate at the base,
with lobed margins, sparsely pilose above with curled hairs,
white-tomentose beneath; petioles 2-10 cm. long, terete,
glandular-pilose. _Inflorescence_ of many inverted scarlet flowers.
_Bracts_ 7 mm. long, boat-shaped, glandular-pilose. _Pedicels_ 7 mm.
long, terete, glandular-pilose. _Calyx-tube_ 2 mm. long; lobes 5 mm.
long, oblong, shortly apiculate, sparsely glandular-pilose. _Petals_ not
all equal, 2-2·3 cm. long, almost 1 cm. broad, oblong-obovate, usually
rounded at the apex, more rarely emarginate. _Stamens_ usually 10,
sometimes 8, in two whorls; filaments 2·7 cm. long, terete; anthers 1·5
mm. long, ovate. _Disc_ cupular below with 10 or 8 arms from the rim of
the cup, each arm has a peltate disc. _Ovary_ about 1 cm. long, terete;
style 1·8 cm. long, terete; stigma simple. (National Herb. Pretoria, No.
2635.)

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 101.--Fig. 1, leaf; 2, flower with petals removed showing
     disc; 3, ground plan of flower; 4, sepal; 5, petal; 6, anthers
     front and side view; 7, stamen; 8, pistil; 9, section through the
     ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _102_.

K A Lansdell del]




PLATE 102.

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM DIGITATUM.

_Cape Province._

FICOIDEAE. Tribe MESEMBRYEAE.
MESEMBRYANTHEMUM, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 853.

     =Mesembryanthemum digitatum=, _Ait. Hort. Kew._ ed. 1, vol. ii. p.
     181 (1789); _M. digitiforme_, Thunb. in Acad. Leop.-Car. Ephem.,
     vol. viii. Append, p. 6 (1791); Thunb. Fl. Cap. p. 412; Fl. Cap.
     vol. ii. p. 405.


This curious _Mesembryanthemum_ was first collected by Carl Thunberg
between the Oliphants River and the Bokkeveld Mountains about 150 years
ago. Thunberg described his plant in 1789, and in his herbarium there is
one sheet with two perfect growths and two flowers upon it. Marloth
(_Flora of South Africa_, Pl. 49) figures a small portion of a plant
which, he states, was collected at Van Rhynsdorp by Mr. W. Spilhaus and
was as large as a child’s head. The specimens from which our
illustration was made were collected in the same locality by Mr. E. Rood
and sent to the Division of Botany, Pretoria.

The corpuscula, which are very succulent, show an extremely interesting
structure when examined in detail. If a longitudinal section is made, a
hard green central core is seen, which is the stem; this is surrounded
by long, crystalline cells, and the whole covered in by a juicy tissue.
As the green tissue is buried in the stem, it is very probable that the
crystalline cells referred to act as lenses and concentrate any light
which penetrates the outer tissue on to the chlorophyll-bearing cells.
The fleshy leaves are almost devoid of chlorophyll.

The flower is borne at the apex of the stem, but this can only be
satisfactorily seen in a longitudinal section. The crystalline cells are
continued round the base of the calyx.

DESCRIPTION:--Acaulescent plant with woody underground stems and fleshy
aerial stems and leaves. _Stems_ 2-3 cm. long, 2-2·5 cm. in diameter,
very succulent, glabrous. _Leaves_ two to each stem, usually one larger
than the other, 1·5-2 cm. long, 0·8-1·3 cm. in diameter, terete, blunt,
very succulent, glabrous. _Flowers_ white, arising from the apex of the
stems but appearing on a casual examination to come from the base of one
of the leaves, when expanded 1·2-1·5 cm. in diameter. _Petals_ in more
than one row; the outermost row connate into definite groups, 7 mm.
long, less than 0·5 mm. broad, linear, subacute. _Stamens_ in four rows;
filaments 1 mm. long, filiform; anthers about 1 mm. long, oblong.
_Calyx_ covered with crystalline cells; lobes almost membranous, 1 cm.
long, 3 mm. broad, oblong, or oblong ovate, obtuse. _Ovary_ sunk in
tissue of stem, 5-celled, with several stalked ovules with axile
placentation; upper portion of ovary cone-shaped tipped with five
terete, acute styles each 1 mm. long.

     PLATE 102.--Fig. 1, longitudinal section of stem showing sheath of
     crystalline cells and flower embedded at apex; 2, longitudinal
     section of flower; 3, sepal; 4, top of ovary showing the five
     stigmas; 5, cross section of ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _103._]




PLATE 103.

BRACHYCORYTHIS PUBESCENS.

_Cape Province. Natal. Swaziland. Transvaal._

ORCHIDACEAE. Tribe OPHRYDEAE.
BRACHYCORYTHIS, _Lindl._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 632.

=Brachycorythis pubescens=, _Harv. Thes. Cop._ i. 35, t. 54;
  _Fl. Cap._ vol. v. sect. 3, p. 86; _Bolus_, _Orchids of S. Afr._ tab. 73.


The genus _Brachycorythis_ is represented in Africa by over twenty
species, five of which occur in South Africa, and of these three are
endemic. The species described here is known from the Cape Province,
Natal, Zululand, Swaziland and the northern Transvaal, and extends into
tropical Africa. Its occurrence near Pretoria, in a totally different
botanical area, is therefore interesting. Harvey first described the
plant from specimens found near Durban by Mr. Sanderson, who stated it
was plentiful in the neighbourhood.

This attractive little orchid was collected by General the Rt. Hon. J.
C. Smuts on the farm Rietvlei No. 221, at Irene, near Pretoria, at an
altitude of about 5000 ft. above sea-level. The plant was found in open
grassland in deep red loam soil. It has large spreading finger-like
tubers and slightly scented flowers.

DESCRIPTION:--A herbaceous plant with long finger-like tubers about 1
cm. thick. _Stem_ with inflorescence up to 50 cm. high. _Leaves_ erect,
crowded 6 cm. long, 3·2 cm. broad at the base of the stem, becoming
smaller above, ovate, acuminate, shortly cuspidate, clasping at the
base, with the midrib prominent beneath, densely pubescent, with the
margins shortly ciliated and somewhat undulate. _Inflorescence_ up to 17
cm. long, racemose, many-flowered. _Bracts_ similar to the leaves but
smaller. _Upper sepal_ 5 mm. long, 3 mm. broad, elliptic, rounded above,
concave, sparsely pubescent without; lateral sepals 4 mm. long, 2·5 mm.
broad, oblong, unequal sided, rounded above, concave, sparsely pubescent
without. _Lateral_ petals 6 mm. long, 3·5 mm. broad, oblong, rounded
above, concave, unequal sided. _Lip_ 9 mm. long, 7 mm. broad, obovate,
3-lobed, the middle lobe smaller than the two lateral lobes, narrowed in
the middle and then expanded to form a deep pouch. _Anther cells_
parallel; pollinia granular, each attached to a separate gland.

     PLATE 103.--Fig. 1, lower part of plant showing tubers; 2, flower
     (enlarged); 3, median longitudinal section of flower; 4, sepals; 5,
     petal; 6, lip; 7, column showing pollinia sacs; 8, pollinium.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _104._]




PLATE 104.

MACKAYA BELLA.

_Natal._

ACANTHACEAE. Tribe JUSTICEAE.

MACKAYA, _Harv._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 1095 (under
_Asystasia_).

=MacKaya bella=, _Harv. Thes. Cap._ i. 8, t. 13; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v. sect. 1,
p. 44; _Wood_, _Natal Plant._ t. 585.


This plant was discovered in Natal by Mr. J. Sanderson, who sent living
specimens to Kew, where it flowered first in May 1869. From the material
a figure of the plant was published in the _Botanical Magazine_ of the
same year. This figure, however, does not accurately represent the plant
as it is known in its native habitat and in local cultivation. The
flowers are lilac, and not almost white, as indicated in the _Botanical
Magazine_. The late Dr. Medley Wood reproduced a pencil drawing of the
plant in “Natal Plants” in 1912, and states it “is a handsome shrub, but
it is of no economic value; it is found only in the coast and midland
districts of Natal, and does not seem to be very common.” _MacKaya
bella_ differs from _Crossandra Greenstockii_ (see Plate 77), which also
belongs to the _Acanthaceae_, in having almost a regular, not a 1-lipped
corolla.

Dr. Harvey, who first described the genus, dedicated it to Dr. J. T.
MacKay, keeper of the Dublin University Botanic Garden. Our figure was
prepared from plants growing in the “Flanagan Arboretum,” Union
Buildings, Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--A shrub about 1-1·5 m. high. _Branches_ pubescent.
_Leaves_ opposite, petioled; blade 3-6 cm. long, 1·3-3·5 cm. broad,
elliptic or elliptic-lanceolate, acuminate, obtuse, usually narrowed at
the base, margins lobulate or subentire, with the nerves distinct
beneath, glabrous; petioles about 1 cm. long, pubescent. _Flowers_
opposite in a terminal lax raceme; the internodes almost 2 cm. long.
_Bracts_ 4·5 mm. long, subulate; bracteoles 2, at the base of the
pedicels. _Pedicel_ 5-7 mm. long, pubescent. _Calyx_ divided almost to
the base; lobes 8 mm. long, acuminate from a base 1 mm. broad, very
finely pubescent, and ciliate on the margins. _Corolla-tube_ 3·5 cm.
long, 2 cm. in diameter at the throat, campanulate above, becoming
cylindric below, finely pubescent; lobes 2 cm. long, 1-1·5 cm. broad,
ovate, obtuse, very finely pubescent or glabrous. _Fertile stamens_ two;
filaments fixed to narrow portion of corolla-tube, 1·5 cm. long, terete,
with a few scattered short stiff hairs; anthers 7 mm. long, bluntly
sagittate at the base, hirsute on the back; sterile stamens represented
by filaments only. _Ovary_ 3 mm. long, 2-celled, with 2 superposed
ovules in each cell, glabrous; style 3·3 cm. long, filiform, with a few
scattered hairs at the base; stigma shortly bifid. (National Herb.
Pretoria, No. 2638.)

     PLATE 104.--Fig. 1, calyx; 2, corolla; 3, anther back view and
     filament; 4, anther front view; 5, ovary; 6, apex of style showing
     shortly bifid stigma; 7, longitudinal section of ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _105._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 105.

ADENIUM OLEIFOLIUM.

_Transvaal. Cape Province._

APOCYNACEAE. Tribe ECHITIDEAE.
ADENIUM, _Roem. et Schult._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 722.

=Adenium oleifolium=, _Stapf_, var. angustifolium, _Phillips_ var. nov., a
typo foliis angustis differt.


The genus _Adenium_ is represented in South Africa by three species
found in the Transvaal, Swaziland and the North-Western Cape Province.
Species of the genus are also found extending through tropical Africa to
Socotra. On Plate 16 we figured _Adenium multiflorum_, from which the
present plant differs in having long narrow leaves; both, however, have
very large tuberous underground stems from which the branches arise. The
peculiar tailed anthers and the scales in the corolla-throat which
sometimes form small pouches are characteristic of the genus.

Specimens were submitted to Kew for confirmation of the name, and the
Director reports “very probably _A. oleifolium_, Stapf, but leaves are
much narrower than in the type,” and it was thought advisable to
describe this as a narrow-leaved variety.

Our plate was prepared from specimens collected by Dr. W. M. Borcherds
at Upington, and forwarded by him to the Division of Botany, Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--Plant with large underground tuberous stems from which the
branches arise. _Branches_ densely pubescent when young, at length
becoming glabrous. _Leaves_ crowded at the ends of the branches, 6-10
cm. long, 2-4 mm. broad, linear, acute, pubescent. _Flowers_ terminal.
_Sepals_ 6·5 mm. long, ovate, acuminate, acute, densely pilose, united
at the base. _Corolla-tube_ 3·5 cm. long, cylindric and 3 mm. in
diameter in lowest third, campanulate and 1·1 cm. in diameter in
uppermost ⅔, pubescent without and within and with pockets in the
angles formed by the lobes; lobes 1·3 cm. long, 8-9 mm. broad,
broadly-elliptic, acuminate, sub-acute, minutely ciliate. _Filaments_ 4
mm. long, thick, terete, densely pilose; anthers 4 mm. long, hairy on
the backs, sagittate at the base and produced into a long coiled apical
hairy appendage 1 cm. long. _Ovary_ 2 mm. long, 2 mm. broad, glabrous,
separating into 2 carpels; style 1·6 cm. long, cylindric, glabrous;
stigmas 3 mm. long, lanceolate, subacuminate, with a mass of glandular
hairs at the back which fix the stigmas to the connective of the
anthers. (National Herb. Pretoria, No. 2598.)

     PLATE 105.--Fig. 1, plant reduced; 2, corolla laid open; 3, corolla
     from above; 4, pocket in corolla; 5, calyx; 6, stamens; 7, style
     and stigma; 8, carpels; 9, median longitudinal section of flower.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _106._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 106.

CRATEROSTIGMA PLANTAGINEUM.

_Transvaal._

SCROPHULARIACEAE. Tribe GRATIOLEAE.
CRATEROSTIGMA, _Hochst._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 954.

=Craterostigma plantagineum=, _Hochst. in Flora_, 1841, 669; _Fl. Cap._
vol. iv. sect. 2, p. 361.


The _Craterostigma_ figured on the accompanying plate is known from
various localities in the Transvaal. It is also recorded from the
neighbourhood of Bulawayo in Rhodesia and from other parts of tropical
Africa reaching as far north as Arabia and Abyssinia. The genus is
mainly a tropical one, and is represented by about a dozen species,
three of which are found in South Africa.

_C. plantagineum_ is a charming little plant which would be well worth
cultivation in the greenhouse and should be easily grown. Our plate was
prepared from specimens collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans, C.M.G., on
the portion of the farm Rietfontein 448, near Pretoria, belonging to Mr.
J. F. Ludorf. The plants were found growing in great profusion in
shallow soil not more than one inch deep on a large quartzite outcrop.
They were in flower during November and December.

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent plant with a rosette of radical leaves.
_Leaves_ 6-6·5 cm. long, 3-3·5 cm. broad (the inner smaller), ovate,
obtuse, narrowed at the base, with crenulate, ciliated margins and with
the nerves depressed above, prominent beneath, glabrous above, pubescent
beneath, especially on the veins. _Peduncles_ 3 or more to a plant,
3·5-4 cm. long, terete, pubescent, bearing about 8 opposite flowers in a
raceme. _Bracts_ 1 cm. long, 5 mm. broad, ovate-lanceolate, acute,
slightly connate at the base, glabrous except on the keel, ciliate.
_Pedicel_ 7 mm. long, flat on the upper surface, convex on the lower
surface, pubescent, ciliate. _Calyx-tube_ 4·5 mm. long, 2·5 mm. in
diameter, deeply fluted, pubescent; lobes 1 mm. long, ovate, sub-acute,
ciliated. _Corolla_ 2-lipped; tube 7 mm. long, tubular; lower lip 9 mm.
long, 1 cm. broad, 3-lobed, with the lobes obovate, crenulate; upper lip
7 mm. long, oblong-ovate, bilobed at the apex. _Stamens_ of two
different kinds; those attached to the lower lip with filaments 7 mm.
long, bent at right angles below and then swollen to form two
callosities on the lip; those attached to the upper lip 2 mm. long;
anther cells diverging, those of each pair of stamens joined. _Ovary_ 2
mm. long, 1·25 mm. in diameter, ovoid; style 8 mm. long, terete,
gradually widening above, glabrous; stigma bilobed, with the lobes
broadly ovate and somewhat membranous. (National Herb. Pretoria, No.
2644.)

     PLATE 106.--Fig. 1, median longitudinal section of flower; 2, front
     view of flower enlarged; 3, bract; 4, calyx; 5, stamens; 6, pistil;
     7, lower portion of under surface of leaf; 8, section of pedicel
     snowing convex and flat surfaces.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _107._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 107.

ALOE COMOSA.

_Cape Province._

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.
ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

=Aloe comosa=, _Marloth and A. Berg. in Engl. Bot. Jahrb._ vol. 38, p. 86.


The Aloe which forms the subject of this plate is, so far as is known,
only found on the Bokkeveld beds in the Clanwilliam and Van Rhynsdorp
Districts of the Cape Province. Full-grown plants attain a height of
12-15 ft., and when in full bloom, which is usually during December and
January, their long massive inflorescences make such a display of colour
in the veld that they cannot fail to attract the notice of the
traveller. As will be seen from the illustration, the uppermost flowers
are hidden by the long bracts, the flowers in the middle portion of the
inflorescence are pink and spreading, while those at the base are
pendulous and greenish-white. The stamens are only exserted from the
pendulous flowers, and after pollination the filaments contract and are
withdrawn into the perianth, which closes round them, leaving the style
exserted. This phenomenon is also found in _Aloe saponaria_ figured on
Plate 96, and is probably fairly general in the genus _Aloe_.

The material from which our plate was made was collected by Dr. I. B.
Pole Evans, C.M.G., on the Doorn River near Van Rhynsdorp, and brought
to Pretoria, where the plants flower regularly every year during
December and January. _Aloe comosa_ was first collected and described by
Dr. R. Marloth, who found it between Clanwilliam and Van Rhynsdorp in
1904.

DESCRIPTION:--Plant with a short stout stem or sometimes up to 12 ft.
bearing a rosette of fleshy leaves at the apex, _Leaves_ up to 52 cm.
long, 10 cm. broad in the widest part, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate,
acute, flat above, slightly convex beneath, deeply channelled on the
upper surface above, with the veins somewhat distinct on the upper
surface and with the margins covered with sharp teeth; teeth 5-7 mm.
apart, 2 mm. long, ovate. _Inflorescence_ lateral about 1·3 m. long,
racemose, narrowly cylindric, with the lowermost flowers pendulous, the
upper flowers erect and adpressed and the median flowers spreading.
_Peduncle_ about 60 cm. long, 1·5 cm. in diameter, terete, covered with
long membranous ovate-acuminate bracts 5 cm. long, 1 cm. broad.
_Floral-bracts_ 6 cm. long, lanceolate, long acuminate, acute, with
membranous margins, encircling the pedicel. _Pedicel_ 1·8-2 cm. long, at
first erect, at length becoming curved, terete. _Perianth-tube_ 1·2 cm.
long, campanulate; outer lobes grenadine-pink, 2 cm. long, 5 mm. broad,
lanceolate, hooded at the apex, 3-nerved; inner lobes whitish, 2 cm.
long, obtuse and hooded at the apex, 1-nerved. _Filaments_ 1·8 cm. long,
lengthening to 4 cm. long in old flowers; anthers 3 mm. long, oblong.
_Ovary_ ellipsoid; style 2 cm. long, lengthening to 4 cm. in old
flowers; stigma simple with a ring of papillose hairs. (National Herb.
Pretoria, No. 2643.)

     PLATE 107.--Fig. 1, entire plant much reduced; 2, inflorescence ×
     ⅔; 3, leaf × ⅔; 4, median longitudinal section of flower; 5, bract;
     6, young flower; 7, mature flower with stamens exserted; 8, inner
     perianth segment; 9, outer perianth segment.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _108._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 108.

PROTEA PITYPHYLLA var. LATIFOLIA.

_Cape Province._

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEAE.
PROTEA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 169.

=Protea pityphylla=, _Phill._ var. latifolia, _Phillips_ var. nov.,
 a typo foliis latis differt.


The _Protea_ figured on the accompanying plate is readily distinguished
from the species by its flat, linear leaves, and on this character alone
has been described as a variety of _P. pityphylla_, Phill. We are
indebted to Miss L. Guthrie of the Bolus Herbarium for the specimens,
which she received from Mr. de Wet of Ceres. The plant is stated to grow
in the same habitat and to be found associated with _P. pityphylla_ and
_P. Marlothii_. It has the characteristic involucre of the former
species, namely, the long leaf-like appendages from the apices of the
lowermost bracts and also the same pendulous heads. The section of the
genus (§ _Pinifoliæ_), comprising species with narrowly linear, filiform
or needle-shaped leaves, to which this plant belongs is illustrated here
for the first time.

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ glabrous. _Leaves_ 5·5-6·5 cm. long, 3 mm.
broad, linear, bluntly apiculate, slightly narrowed to the base,
glabrous. _Head_ sessile, 4·5 cm. long, about 6·5 cm. in diameter,
cernuous. _Involucral-bracts_ 7-8-seriate, glabrous; the outer ovate,
obtuse, sometimes subacuminate, minutely ciliate, the lowermost produced
into long foliaceous appendages resembling the leaves; inner 3·5 cm.
long, 1·3 cm. broad, concave, arching over and exceeding the flowers.
_Perianth-sheath_ 2 cm. long, dilated and 3-keeled below, setulose on
the uppermost portion, otherwise glabrous; lip 5·5 mm. long, 3-toothed,
3-keeled, setulose below; teeth subequal, ·5 mm. long, the middle tooth
smaller than the two lateral. _Filaments_ ·5 mm. long; anthers 3·5 mm.
long, linear, with an ovate fleshy apical gland less than ·5 mm. long.
_Ovary_ covered with long golden hairs; style over 2·5 cm. long, widened
and much compressed at the base, sickle-shaped, glabrous; stigma 4 mm.
long, scarcely swollen at the junction with the style, obtuse. (National
Herb. Pretoria, No. 2586.)

     PLATE 108.--Fig. 1, receptacle; 2, unopened flower; 3, flower with
     perianth segments separated; 4, base of style showing the flattened
     portion.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _109._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 109.

TRIASPIS NELSONI.

_Transvaal._

MALPIGHIACEAE. Tribe HIRRAE.
TRIASPIS, _Burch._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 259.

=Triaspis Nelsoni=, _Oliv. in Hook. Ic. Pl._ t. 1418.


_Triaspis Nelsoni_ was first described and figured in 1883 from material
collected by Mr. W. Nelson at Pretoria. The figure given by Hooker is
incorrect in a few small details. The pedicels, for instance, are
articulated and bear 2 small bracteoles; the three styles are not equal,
but one is longer than the other two and is deflexed at an angle of
about 45°; the anterior petal is exterior in the bud and larger than the
other petals.

The genus Triaspis is found in Madagascar, tropical and southern Africa,
and was first recorded by the famous traveller Burchell, who collected
specimens of a plant he described as _T. hypericoides_ at Kosi Fountain
in Bechuanaland in 1812. Since then several species have been recorded
from the Transvaal.

The species figured on the accompanying plate is of frequent occurrence
on the soils overlying the dolomite outcrops south of Pretoria at an
elevation of 4000-5000 ft. above sea-level. It forms a subherbaceous
bush not more than two feet high, and the main branches always tend to
droop. When in flower it is a most attractive and beautiful object in
the veld, and is well worth cultivation in our gardens. In addition to
the beauty of its flowers, its large copper-coloured orbicular winged
fruits add considerably to its charm and gracefulness. The material from
which our plate was prepared was collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans,
C.M.G., on the farm Doornkloof, Irene, near Pretoria, belonging to
General the Rt. Hon. J. C. Smuts.

DESCRIPTION:--A subherbaceous plant with long slender and graceful
branches from an underground rootstock. _Branches_ terete, pubescent.
_Leaves_ opposite, decussate, 2-3 cm. long, 1-2·2 cm. broad, the upper
leaves smaller than the lower, ovate, sub-apiculate, cordate at the
base, with distinct reticulate veining and with the midrib prominent
beneath, sparsely pubescent, with ciliated margins. _Inflorescence_ a
5-6-flowered axillary raceme, arranged in the axils of the upper leaves.
_Peduncle_ 1·3 cm. long, terete, pubescent. _Pedicels_ 1·5 cm. long,
articulated in the lowermost ⅓, pubescent, bearing 2 small bracts.
_Sepals_ 3·5 mm. long, 1·5 mm. broad, oblong, rounded above, sparsely
pubescent. _Petals_ 1 cm. long, 6 mm. broad, concave, oblong, rounded
above, produced into a claw at the base, with fimbriated margins; the
lowermost petal overlapping the others in bud and larger than the rest.
_Stamens_ 10; filaments 5 mm. long, glabrous; stamens 2 mm. long,
linear-oblong. _Ovary_ 2 mm. long, globose, villous; styles 3, two stand
erect; the posterior style reflexed and smaller than the other two.
_Fruit_ 3-winged with the wings deeply saucer-shaped. (National Herb.
Pretoria, No. 2642.)

     PLATE 109.--Fig. 1, bud; 2, median longitudinal section of flower;
     3, pistil; 4, fruit..

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _110._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 110.

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM PILLANSII.

_Cape Province._

FICOIDEAE. Tribe MESEMBRYEAE.
_Mesembryanthemum_, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 853.

=Mesembryanthemum Pillansii=, _Kensit in Plant. Nov. Hort. Then._ II.
tab. 57 (1908); _Botanical Mag._ t. 8703.


Dr. R. Marloth supplies the following interesting note on this plant.
“Originally found by Mr. Eustace Pillans (not Mr. N. Pillans, as stated
in the _Botanical Magazine_) on the farm Mouton Valley on the Piquetberg
mountains to the north-west of Piquetberg.

The present plants were gathered by me at the same locality in October
1922 on sandstone hills among _Protea_ trees (waabom, _P. grandiflora_),
forming shrublets 1½ to 2 ft. high with erect virgate branches.

The description in the _Botanical Magazine_ is fairly correct, but the
coloured petals are all radiating on the wild plants (not some erect and
conniving, as stated in the _Botanical Magazine_ for the cultivated
plants). They are arranged in 5 groups in front of the sepals. The
stigmata are distinct and papillate in the later stages of the flower.

The plant is easily cultivated at Cape Town, and I have had it in flower
for several years from September to December.

The flowers are of special biological interest. The stamens do not stand
erect as in most other species, but are incurved towards the centre to
such an extent that the filaments from opposite stamens meet and the
anthers are consequently enclosed in the lentil-shaped cavity thus
formed above the concave apex of the ovary. The roof of this cavity is
further strengthened by the filiform white inner petals which possess a
rough surface and are also tightly incurved inwards, meeting at the
centre.

The pollen is produced in profusion, and a mass of white powder is
found in every flower when slit open at this stage. In all the flowers
examined by me I found a number of small black beetles not more than 2
mm. long and a few specimens of haplothrips, all thoroughly covered with
pollen. These insects are able to force their way in between the
filaments and inner petals, but cannot escape until the stamens wither.
Up to that time no stigmatic surfaces are visible in the centre of the
flower, but within a few days, when the flower is about a week old and
when the pollen at first accumulated in the concave apex of the ovary
has been blown away by the wind, the stigmas develop to a length of 2-3
mm., showing a papillate surface, and are then in a condition to be
cross-pollinated by the insects released from flowers in the first
stage.”

DESCRIPTION:--A succulent plant. _Branches_ glabrous, angled and
somewhat winged. _Leaves_ connate 2·8-4 cm. long, ovate, acute, flat
above, acutely keeled beneath, with the margins somewhat scarious.
_Flowers_ terminal, about 4 cm. in diameter when expanded. _Sepals_
unequal, ovate, acuminate, acute, two of the sepals have membranous
appendages on the inner face. _Petals_ 1·7 cm. long, obovate, produced
into a long claw. _Stamens_ bending over into cavity of receptacle;
filaments linear. _Stigmas_ sessile on floor of receptacle. (National
Herb. Pretoria, No. 2646.)

     PLATE 110.--Fig. 1, median longitudinal section of flower with
     sepals and petals removed; 2, sepals; 3, petal enlarged; 4, stamen;
     5, cross section of ovary; 6, fruit; 7, section of leaf.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _111._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 111.

ALOE MICROCANTHA.

_Cape Province, Swaziland, Transvaal._

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

=Aloe microcantha=, _Haw. Suppl._ 105; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 306; _Sims in
Bot. Mag._ t. 2272.


_Aloe microcantha_, which forms the subject of the accompanying plate,
occurs frequently in the open grass veld along the eastern mountain
range from Grahamstown northwards as far as the valley of the Limpopo.
In Swaziland and the eastern Transvaal it is usually found along the
edges of streams and in marshy places. In localities of high rainfall,
such as Haenertsberg on the Drakensbergen in the Transvaal, this plant
is often a conspicuous and beautiful object on the grassy slopes facing
east. It flowers during January and February. As soon as the seed has
set, a few months later, the leaves wither almost completely to their
bases, leaving a short stem surrounded by a few dried leaves to weather
the winter drought.

We are indebted to Mr. Chas. Maggs of Pretoria for the specimen figured
in our illustration. It was collected by Mr. Maggs on his Waterval
Estate, near Sabie, on the Drakensberg, in January 1921, and forwarded
to the Division of Botany, where it flowered in January the following
year.

_Aloe microcantha_ was first collected by Bowie and introduced into
cultivation in 1819. It was figured in Curtis’ _Botanical Magazine_ in
1821 as a plant of great rarity from the Cape of Good Hope.

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent plant. _Leaves_ up to 33 cm. long, 4·5 cm.
broad at the base, lanceolate, acuminate, acute, concave, sparsely
covered with greenish-white spots near the base and with rigidly
ciliated margins. _Inflorescence_ about 50 cm. long, terete, glabrous,
bearing a few distant membranous ovate acuminate acute bracts.
_Inflorescence_ congested, corymbose. _Bracts_ 1·5 cm. long, ovate,
acuminate, acute. _Pedicels_ 3 cm. long, terete, glabrous. _Perianth_
2·8 to 3·2 cm. long; lobes 2·7 cm. long, 6 mm. broad, linear, obtuse.
_Filaments_ 2 cm. long, filiform; anthers linear. _Ovary_ 1 cm. long,
cylindric; style 2·7 cm. long, filiform; stigma simple. (National Herb.
Pretoria, No. 2645.)

     PLATE 111.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; 2, median longitudinal
     section of flower; 3, perianth segments; 4, anther; 5, style; 6,
     cross-section of leaf about the middle.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _112._

K.A. Lansdell del.]




PLATE 112.

ERYTHRINA HUMEANA.

_Cape Province, Natal._

LEGUMINOSAE. Tribe PHASEOLEAE.

ERYTHRINA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 531.

=Erythrina Humeana=, _Spreng. Syst._ iii. 243; _E. Humei, E. Mey. Comm.
Pl. Afr. Austr._ 150; _Fl. Cap._ vol. i. p. 237.


In a previous issue, on Plate 59, we figured the Kaffir Boom (_Erythrina
caffra_), from which the present species differs in being of a dwarf
habit and having the nerves of the leaves and petioles covered with
prickles. It is a common plant on the slopes of the Drakensberg in
Natal, extending southward to Grahamstown, and during the summer months
the bright red flowers are very conspicuous in the veld. The leaves of
this species, as well as those of _E. caffra_, are attacked by a
gall-producing insect, and the seeds are attacked by insects to such an
extent that it is difficult to find ripe seed.

The species has been known to cultivators in Europe for over 100 years,
and was figured in the _Botanical Magazine_ as early as 1823. It is a
very handsome shrub which stands from 4 to 8 ft. high, and is well worth
cultivation.

DESCRIPTION:--An erect shrub ·9 to 3 m. high. _Stem_ and branches
terete, ashen-grey, prickly. _Leaves_ pinnately trifoliate, 5 to 7·5 cm.
long and wide, broadly ovate, gradually narrowing to an acute apex,
occasionally very much attenuated and 3-veined at the base; the terminal
leaflet similar but smaller and broader in proportion to its length; the
midribs of all usually bearing prickles; stipule 6 mm. long, oblong,
acute; stipellae glandular. _Petiole_ 5 to 7·5 cm. long, with scattered
broad-based prickles along its whole length. _Peduncle_ 30 to 40 cm.
long, terete, bearing flowers in the upper half. _Flowers_ crowded.
_Calyx_ 5-toothed, 1 cm. long, pubescent; tube subcylindric; teeth
acute. _Vexillum_ 3·7 cm. long, oblong; alae 1 cm. long, oblong; carina
1·1 cm. long, ovate. _Ovary_ many-ovuled, tipped with the persistent
style. _Legume_ 7·5 to 12·5 cm. long, 2-to 5-seeded, torulose with wide
spaces between the seeds.

     PLATE 112.--Fig. 1, leaf and raceme, natural size; 2, calyx, twice
     natural size; 3, vexillum; 4, wing; 5, keel; 6, stamens; 7, pistil;
     8, pod; 9, portion of branch, much reduced.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _113._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 113.

ADENIA DIGITATA.

_Transvaal._

PASSIFLORACEAE. Tribe MODECCEAE.

ADENIA, _Forsk. Fl. Aegypt. Arab._ 77 (1775).

=Adenia digitata=, _Engl. Bot. Jahrb._ vol. xiv. p. 375; _Modecca digitata,
Harv. Thes. Cap._ t. 12, 167; _Fl. Cap._ vol. ii. p. 499.


The species of _Adenia_ described below and figured on the accompanying
Plate is of special interest, inasmuch as the large tuberous roots have
proved to be extremely poisonous. In October 1922 the plant was brought
to the notice of the Division of Botany by Dr. H. Osborne of Pretoria,
who reported that two white labourers were admitted to the Pretoria
Hospital suspected of having been poisoned by eating a portion of the
root, and that one of them died shortly after admission to the Hospital.
A sample of the root sent in by Dr. Osborne was submitted to Drs. H. H.
Green and W. H. Andrews of the Division of Veterinary Research, and as a
result of their investigations two types of poison were discovered. One
of these acts very rapidly, and with symptoms which can be attributed to
the small amount of a cyanogetic glucoside; the other acts more slowly,
but its chemical nature is as yet unknown. A full account of these
investigations will be published in the _Report of the Director of
Veterinary Research_.

The fruits of _Adenia digitata_ are berries of a very attractive nature,
and also appear to be poisonous, for some years ago in the Pretoria
District two native children died after eating them.

The plant is quite common in the Pretoria District, and also occurs in
the Barberton District. It has long, graceful branches provided with
tendrils, by means of which it climbs up neighbouring bushes and shrubs.

DESCRIPTION:--_Roots_ tuberous, sometimes up to 50 cm. in diameter.
_Stems_ striate. _Leaves_ 8 to 14 cm. long, digitately 3-to 5-lobed; the
middle lobe pinnatisect; the side lobes again lobed on one side only or
pinnatilobed, more rarely almost entire; the mid-rib prominent above and
beneath, and with two prominent glands on the upper side at base of the
lamina, and with glands beneath at the base of each leaf-segment,
glabrous; petiole 1·3 to 1·7 cm. long, 6 to 7 mm. broad, flat above,
convex beneath, glabrous. _Calyx-tube_ 1·5 cm. long, campanulate, 1 cm.
in diameter above, narrowing to 1·5 mm. in diameter at the base,
glabrous; lobes 7 cm. long, 5·5 mm. broad, ovate, obtuse, glabrous; two
lobes with entire, the other three with lacerated margins. _Petals_ 9
mm. long, 2·5 mm. broad at the widest part, obovate, acuminate, obtuse,
narrowed at the base, with shortly ciliated margins, 3-nerved.
_Filaments_ united at the base, 4 mm. long, linear, broadening at the
base; anthers 6·5 mm. long, 1·5 mm. broad, linear, falcate when seen in
side view. _Glands_ at base of filaments ·5 mm. long, more or less
quadrate. _Style_ 1 mm. long, bilobed at the apex. _Corona_ represented
by a fimbriated rim. _Fruit_ fleshy, 3·5 cm. long, 2·5 cm. in diameter.
_Female flower_ not seen. (National Herb. Pretoria, No. 2639.)

     PLATE 113.--Fig. 1, tuberous root × ½; 2, portion of petiole and
     bases of leaf-lobes showing glands; 3, flower laid open showing
     entire and fimbriated sepals; 4, petal; 5, stamens side view; 6,
     stamen front view; 7, fruit; 8, longitudinal section of fruit
     showing seeds.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _114._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 114.

WACHENDORFIA PANICULATA.

_Cape Province._

HAEMODORACEAE. Tribe EUHAEMODOREAE.

WACHENDORFIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 673.

=Wachendorfia paniculata=, _Linn. Sp. Plant._ 59; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 2.


This plant is popularly known as “rooi knol,” because of the deep red
colour of the tubers when cut, and it is also known as “Spinnekop blom,”
as the colour and marking of the perianth resemble that of some spiders.
The latter name is also applied to _Ferraria undulata_ (see Plate 66 for
an illustration of a species of the genus).

The species was known in England at least as early as 1767, as there is
a record of its introduction into Kew Gardens in that year. The dull
brown colour of the flowers, which is rare among South African plants,
does not make the plant a very ornamental object in gardens, but as the
plant is interesting botanically it should have a place in any
collection of the native flora.

The family _Haemodoraceae_ contains about 120 species, found principally
in Australia, but species are also known in North and South America and
in Asia. In South Africa the family is represented by less than 50
species, the largest genus being _Sansevieria_. The genus _Wachendorfia_
is known by only two species.

Our plate was prepared from plants sent by Mrs. E. Rood, Van Rhynsdorp;
they flowered at the Division of Botany in 1922.

DESCRIPTION:--_Rhizomes_ a deep red colour when freshly cut. _Leaves_ 5
to 6 to a plant, 16 to 23 cm. long, 1·2 to 1·8 cm. broad,
long-lanceolate, acuminate, acute, narrowed below, sheathing at the base
with 3 main nerves, glabrous and with ciliated margins. _Peduncle_,
including the inflorescence, up to 60 cm. long, glandular-pubescent,
with about 3 reduced leaves 5 cm. long, and long-acuminate from a broad
base. _Inflorescence_ a lax panicle. _Bracts_ 1 to 3 cm. long, long
acuminate, membranous, distinctly veined, pilose. _Pedicels_ ·6 to 1 cm.
long, pilose with glandular hairs. _Outer perianth-lobes_ 1·7 cm. long,
4·5 mm. broad, oblanceolate, obtuse, many-nerved, pilose outside with
glandular hairs; inner lobes 1·7 cm. long, 3·5 mm. broad, oblanceolate,
obtuse, membranous, nerved, glabrous. _Filaments_ 1·2 cm. long, linear,
narrowing above, membranous, with a single vein, glabrous; anthers 2·5
mm. long, oblong. _Ovary_ 2 mm. in diameter, bluntly 3-angled, very
densely pilose with glandular hairs; style 1·95 cm. long, linear,
glabrous; stigma simple. (National Herb. Pretoria, No. 2605.)

     PLATE 114.--Fig. 1, perianth segment; 2, stamen and single anther;
     3, pistil showing side and top view of ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _115._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 115.

CRASSULA CONGESTA.

_Cape Province._

CRASSULACEAE.

CRASSULA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 657.

=Crassula congesta=, _N. E. Br. in Gard. Chron._ 11 (1902), p. 171; _C.
pachyphylla, Schonl. in Record. Albany Museum_, vol. i. (1903), pp. 59,
67.


This little _Crassula_, which belongs to the section _Pryamidella_, is,
as pointed out by Dr. Schonland, closely allied to _C. columnaris_,
Thunb., but the shape of the leaves is sufficient to distinguish it from
the latter species. It was described almost simultaneously by Mr. N. E.
Brown and Dr. Schonland, but as Brown’s description was the first to be
published we retain his name for the species.

_Crassula congesta_ appears to be confined to the Matjesfontein and
Laingsburg Divisions in the Karroo, and at present we have no records of
the species outside these two Divisions.

We are indebted to Mr. A. J. Austin of Matjesfontein for living
specimens which flowered at the Division of Botany in July 1922.

DESCRIPTION:--Plant succulent, about 9 cm. high. _Stem_ glabrous.
_Leaves_ 1·7 cm. long, up to 2·7 cm. broad, decussate, connate,
transversely oblong, convex without, concave within, glabrous. _Heads_
many flowered, 2·5 cm. in diameter. _Receptacle_ convex. _Floral-bracts_
·5 mm. long, ·75 mm. broad, linear, obtuse; ciliated, membranous.
_Calyx-tube_ 1 mm. long, glabrous, membranous; lobes 2·5 mm. long, ·5
mm. broad, linear, obtuse, ciliate. _Corolla-tube_ 3·5 mm. long,
membranous; lobes 5 mm. long, ·75 mm. broad, linear, obtuse. _Filaments_
2 mm. long, filiform; anthers 1·25 mm. long, oblong. _Squamae_ 1 mm.
long, spatulate and produced into a long claw. _Carpels_ 2·5 mm. long,
tapering from the base upwards; stigma simple. (National Herb. Pretoria,
No. 2602.)

     PLATE 115.--Figs. 1, 2, leaf and section of leaf; 3, single flower;
     4, corolla opened; 5, sepal; 6, bract; 7, scale; 8, carpels showing
     scales.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _116._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 116.

GLADIOLUS PSITTACINUS.

_Cape Province, Orange Free State, Transvaal, Natal, Portuguese East
Africa._

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

GLADIOLUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.

=Gladiolus psittacinus=, _Hook. in Bot. Mag._ 3032; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi.
p. 158.


On Plate 6 we figured a variety of this magnificent species of
_Gladiolus_, which differs from our present plant not only in the
colouring of the flower, but also in the size of the perianth-segments.

It was figured in the _Botanical Magazine_ (t. 3032) from specimens
which flowered at Kew, and was known in cultivation in England at least
as early as 1830, and in Holland before that date.

A bed of plants growing at the Division of Botany, Pretoria, made an
exceptionally fine display this season (1923), and there can be little
doubt that it is the finest native _Gladiolus_ to be found in South
Africa.

The plant is quite easily propagated, and forms new corms very readily.
It is commonly known as the “Natal Lily.” Our plate was prepared from
specimens forwarded by Mr. H. E. Forsyth, the Curator, Municipal Park,
Benoni, and were stated to have been collected in Portuguese East
Africa.

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ 3 cm. in diameter, globose, covered with fibrous
tunics. _Plant_ 1 to 1·5 m. high. _Leaves_ 10 to 12 to a plant,
equitant, up to 70 cm. long, 2·5 to 3 cm. broad, ensiform, acuminate,
acute, with a prominent midrib above and beneath, and with the lateral
veins distinct, with a cartilaginous margin which is sometimes very
minutely denticulate, glabrous. _Spike_ ·3 to almost 1 m. long, up to
15-flowered. _Outer spathe_ 8 cm. long, 2·1 cm. broad, ovate, acuminate,
acute, closely nerved, glabrous; inner spathe 6 cm. long, 1·8 cm. broad,
ovate, acute, 2-keeled, glabrous (in the flowering stage spathes are
smaller). _Perianth-tube_ 4 cm. long, 1 cm. in diameter above, yellow on
the posterior side, red on anterior side. _Upper lobe_ 5·5 cm. long, 3·2
cm. broad, obovate, narrowed to the base, shortly cuspidate; side lobes
4·5 cm. long, 3·5 cm. broad, ovate, obtuse; lower lateral lobes 3 cm.
long, 1·5 cm. broad, elliptic, narrowed to the base, acuminate, acute;
lowest petal 3·5 cm. long, 1·8 cm. broad, elliptic narrowed to the base,
cuspidate at the apex. _Anthers_ 1·6 cm. long, linear, sagittate at the
base. _Style_ 7 cm. long, terete, glabrous; lobes 6 cm. long, spatulate,
papillose on the margins. _Young fruit_ 4·5 cm. long, 3-angled. _Seeds_
winged. (National Herb. Pretoria, No. 2711.)

     PLATE 116.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; 2, longitudinal section of
     flower; 3, outer bract; 4, inner bract; 5, anther with part of
     filament; 6, stigmas with part of style; 7, young fruit; 8, seed.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _117._

S. Gower del.]




PLATE 117.

VENIDIUM MACROCEPHALUM.

_S.W. Africa._

COMPOSITAE. Tribe ARCTOTIDEAE.

VENIDIUM, _Less._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 459.

=Venidium macrocephalum=, _DC. Prodr._ vol. vi. p. 494; _Fl. Cap._ vol.
iii. p. 463; _Bot. Mag._ t. 8845.


Our illustration was made from plants raised at the Division of Botany,
Pretoria, from seed collected by Dr. J. M. Troup at Aus in South-west
Africa. The plant flowers freely and makes a splendid display, and as a
garden plant for supplying cut flowers it is well worth cultivation.

Seed was sent by the Chief of the Division of Botany to Kew in 1918, and
the plants raised were figured in the _Botanical Magazine_ (t. 8845).
Mr. J. Hutchinson, who drew up the description for the _Botanical
Magazine_, gives as his reason for retaining this genus separate from
_Arctotis_ (see Plate 3) that the latter has a well-developed double
pappus, whereas in _Venidium_ the pappus is either absent or very
rudimentary.

The species of _Venidium_, in common with many species of _Gazania_,
_Arctotis_ and _Dimorphotheca_, are collectively known as “Gous Bloom.”

DESCRIPTION:--A herbaceous sticky plant with radicle leaves. _Leaves_ 16
to 19 cm. long lyrate; the uppermost lobe 7 to 8 cm. long, 2·5 to 5 cm.
broad, the margins lobed with broad oblong lobes, with three main veins,
distinct above and prominent beneath, cobwebby on both surfaces; lower
lobes 1 to 2·5 cm. long; ·7 to 1·3 broad, oblong, obtuse, cobwebby above
and beneath; petiole flat above, convex beneath, with three distinct
keels, scantily cobwebby; cauline leaves 2 to 9 cm. long, pinnatilobed,
eared and somewhat clasping at the base. _Stems_ up to 33 cm. long,
terete, ribbed, covered with long glandular hairs. _Heads_ solitary at
ends of stems, 8 to 9 cm. in diameter when fully expanded. _Involucral
bracts_ in 4 rows; outermost 8 mm. long, acuminate from a broad base,
green, covered with long glandular hairs; innermost 1·2 cm. long,
glabrous, membranous. _Receptacle_ 1·5 cm. in diameter, honeycombed, the
margins of the cells membranous and produced into long awns.
_Ray-floret_ female, lemon-chrome, orange at base. _Tube_ 3 mm. long,
cylindric; lobe 3·5 cm. long, 7 mm. broad, lanceolate, minutely
3-toothed at the apex, 2-keeled beneath; at throat of tube are four
minute black structures representing reduced corolla lobes. _Pappus_
less than ·5 mm. membranous. _Ovary_ 1 mm. long; style 4 mm. long,
terete, thickened below the lobes; lobes 1 mm. long, oblong, obtuse.
_Disc-florets_ hermaphrodite. _Corolla-tube_ 3 mm. long, 1·25 mm. in
diameter above, slightly narrower at the base, sparsely glandular; lobes
1·5 mm. long, linear, obtuse. _Anthers_ black, 2·25 mm. long, blunt at
base. _Ovary_ and pappus similar to those of ray-florets; style thin for
the first 3 mm., then suddenly much thickened in the upper 2 mm. of its
length; lobes ·5 mm. long, oblong, obtuse. (National Herb. Pretoria, No.
2599.)

     PLATE 117.--Fig. 1, basal leaf reduced; 2, outer involucral bract;
     3, inner involucral bract; 4, longitudinal section through
     receptacle; 5, surface view of part of receptacle; 6, ray-floret;
     7, stigmas and portion of style of ray-floret; 8, disc-floret; 9,
     stigmas and portion of style of disc-floret; 10, fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _118._

S Gower del]




PLATE 118.

LONCHOSTOMA MONOSTYLIS.

_Cape Province._

BRUNIACEAE.

LONCHOSTOMA, _Wickstr._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 673.

=Lonchostoma monostylis=, _Sond. in Harv. et Sond. Fl. Cap._ vol. ii.
p. 317.


This member of the family _Bruniaceae_ differs from that previously
figured (_Brunia Stokoei_, Plate 92) in having a tubular corolla. In
this respect it is also unique in the family. The genus is a small one,
comprising only four known species.

Ecklon and Zeyher collected this plant in the Palmiet River Valley, and
since then it has not been recorded until recently, when Mr. T. P.
Stokoe gathered it in the same locality. He sent fresh specimens to the
Division of Botany, and from these the plate was made.

_Lonchostoma monostylis_ is a graceful plant with long, thin, erect
stems, at the apex of which the flowers are borne.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stems_ simple or sometimes branched above, 40 to 50 cm.
long, almost woolly, at length becoming glabrous. _Leaves_ erect,
adpressed to the branches and almost hiding them, 5 to 6 mm. long, 1·5
to 2 mm. broad, elliptic, obtuse, with a small black mucro, concave,
pubescent without, glabrous within, long ciliate. _Flower-heads_
terminal, 1·3 cm. in diameter, about 14-flowered. _Bracteoles_ 5 mm.
long, 1 mm. broad at the base, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, with a long
black mucro, membranous long pilose and ciliate. _Sepals_ similar to the
bracteoles. _Corolla-tube_, 3 mm. long, glabrous; lobes 6 mm. long, 3 to
3·5 mm. broad, obovate, shortly acuminate, obtuse. _Anthers_ subsessile,
1·5 mm. long, linear, sagittate at the base. _Ovary_ 1 mm. long,
globose, pilose; style 2 mm. long, terete, glabrous; stigma minutely
bifid. (National Herb. Pretoria, No. 2600.)

     PLATE 118.--Fig. 1, corolla laid open; 2, bract and bracteole; 3,
     leaf and calyx; 4, anther; 5, pistil; 6, cross-section of ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _119._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 119.

EULOPHIA ZEYHERI.

_Cape Province, Transvaal, Natal, Basutoland._

ORCHIDACEAE. Tribe VANDEAE.

EULOPHIA, _R. Br._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 535.

=Eulophia Zeyheri=, _Hook. f. Bot. Mag._ t. 7330; _Bolus Ic. Orch.
Austr.-Afr._ ii. t. 24; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v. sect. iii. p. 43.


This pretty little orchid is quite a common plant in the grass veld
during the summer months, and has been extensively gathered by botanical
collectors, though strangely enough it is not generally met with in
gardens. It has been known to botanists for about sixty years, but under
the name _E. bicolor_, until Sir Joseph Hooker in 1893 pointed out that
this name had already been assigned to another species in the genus, and
published the present name _E. Zeyheri_.

The tubers resemble a string of large beads, and send out leaves and
roots from the constrictions between the swollen portions. The plant has
been successfully grown in Gloucestershire, England, by the late Mr. H.
J. Elwes, and should certainly receive the attention of South African
cultivators.

Our illustration was made from specimens collected by Dr. I. B. Pole
Evans, C.M.G., at Irene, near Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent herb with large underground fleshy tubers 7
cm. long, about 5 cm. in diameter, and thick cylindric roots arising
from the junction of the tuber and short stem. _Leaves_ three to four to
a plant, 19 to 30 cm. long, 1·5 to 3 cm. broad, lanceolate linear,
subacuminate, acute, plicate, with the primary nerves prominent beneath,
glabrous. _Inflorescence_ lateral, racemose, about 26-flowered.
_Peduncle_ about 30 cm. long, surrounded by brown membranous sheaths 8
to 9 cm. long. _Floral-bracts_ 4 cm. long, linear, acuminate, acute.
_Pedicels_ about 6 mm. long. _Sepals_ 2·8 cm. long, 1·1 cm. broad,
ovate-lanceolate, shortly acuminate, acute, the upper sepal slightly
narrower. _Side petals_ 2·6 cm. long, 1 cm. broad, lanceolate, acute.
_Lip_ 3 cm. long, 1·3 cm. broad, 3-lobed; the middle lobe, obovate,
obtuse, sparsely covered with short filaments and produced at the base
into 2 keels; side lobes deep purple, 8 mm. long, 9 mm. broad,
ovate-oblong, obtuse, unequal sided; spur 5 mm. long, slightly curved,
terete, blunt. _Column_ 1 cm. long, 3 mm. broad, oblong, convex on the
back, deeply concave on the face. _Operculum_ ovate; pollinia ovate,
attached to a single gland. _Stigma_ kidney-shaped. (National Herb.
Pretoria, No. 2650.)

     PLATE 119.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; 2, bract; 3, median
     longitudinal section of flower; 4, sepal; 5, side petal; 6, 7, lip;
     8, column.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.

[Illustration: _120._

S Gower del.]




PLATE 120.

HESSEA REHMANNI.

_Transvaal._

AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLIDEAE.

HESSEA, _Herb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 720.

=Hessea Rehmanni=, _Baker, Hanb. Amaryllid._ 22; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 190.


This species differs from the one we previously figured (_H. Zeyheri_,
Plate 43) in not having a short perianth-tube above the ovary. The
species here figured is evidently quite common in some localities in the
High Veld, growing amongst the grass, but has not been extensively
collected. Rehmann first found the plant on which Baker based his
description, and it has since been found by Miss Saunders and Mr. E. E.
Galpin near Johannesburg. Our illustration was made from specimens
collected by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans, C.M.G., at Kaalfontein, between
Pretoria and Johannesburg.

Baker in his description mentions that the pedicels are strongly angled,
but we suspect that is solely due to drying, as in the fresh material
the pedicels are quite terete.

Like many other plants belonging to the _Amaryllidaceae_, the seeds may
commence germination before falling from the capsule.

As far as we are aware the species has no common name, and we would
suggest “wit sambrieltje” for this little plant.

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 1·8 cm. long, 1·5 cm. in diameter, globose, covered
with papery tunics and produced into a neck about 1 to 1·5 cm. long.
_Leaves_ usually one, more rarely two, 9 cm. long, filiform, quite
terete or with a shallow channel, glabrous. _Peduncle_ 15 cm. long,
terete, glabrous. _Inflorescence_ a centripetal umbel of about nine
flowers. _Spathe-valves_ 2 mm. long, ovate, acute. _Pedicels_ 8 mm.
long, terete, glabrous. _Perianth-segments_ 8 mm. long, 1·5 mm. broad,
linear, much crisped, with 3 segments minutely and bluntly apiculate and
with papillae at the apex. _Filaments_ attached to base of
perianth-segments, 5 mm. long, terete; anthers 1 mm. long, orbicular,
basifixed. _Ovary_ 2·5 mm. in diameter, globose, glabrous with a single
ovule in each cell; style 7 mm. long, terete; stigmas 3, papillose.
(National Herb. Pretoria, No. 2713.)

     PLATE 120.--Fig. 1, section of part of leaf showing shallow
     channel; 2, involucral bract; 3, median longitudinal section of
     flower; 4, perianth segment; 5, anther; 6, style and stigmas; 7,
     fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1923.




INDEX TO VOLUME III,


                                                                   PLATE

ADENIA DIGITATA,                                                     113

ADENIUM OLEIFOLIUM,                                                  105

ALOE COMOSA,                                                         107

ALOE MICROCANTHA,                                                    111

ALOE SAPONARIA,                                                       96

ALOE VARIEGATA,                                                       86

BRACHICORYTHIS PUBESCENS,                                            103

BRUNIA STOKOEI,                                                       92

CERATOTHECA TRILOBA,                                                  87

CHRYSOPHYLLUM MAGALISMONTANUM,                                        98

CLEMATOPSIS STANLEYI,                                                 81

CRASSULA CONGESTA,                                                   115

CRATEROSTIGMA PLANTAGINEUM,                                          106

CYRTANTHUS HELICTUS,                                                  99

DICOMA ZEYHERI,                                                       88

ERYTHRINA HUMEANA,                                                   112

EULOPHIA ZEYHERI,                                                    119

GERBERA PLANTAGINEA,                                                  85

GLADIOLUS PSITTACINUS,                                               116

GREYIA RADLKOFERI,                                                   101

HESSEA REHMANNI,                                                     120

HOODIA BAINII,                                                        93

HYOBANCHE FULLERI,                                                    89

LACHENALIA ROODEAE,                                                   91

LEUCOSPERMUM CORDATUM,                                                95

LONCHOSTOMA MONOSTYLIS,                                              118

MACKAYA BELLA,                                                       104

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM DIGITATUM,                                          102

MESEMBRYANTHEMUM PILLANSII,                                          110

MIMETES HOTTENTOTICA,                                                 82

PROTEA COMPACTA,                                                      84

PROTEA PITYPHYLLA var. LATIFOLIA,                                    108

PROTEA STOKOEI,                                                      100

ROMULEA AUSTINII,                                                     90

SENECIO MEDLEY-WOODII,                                                83

SYNNOTIA METELERKAMPIAE,                                              97

TRIASPIS NELSONI,                                                    109

TRITONIA MATHEWSIANA,                                                 94

VENIDIUM MACROCEPHALUM,                                              117

WACHENDORFIA PANICULATA,                                             114

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF SOUTH
AFRICA; VOL. 3/3 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
