DESCRIPTION:--An acaulescent plant. _Leaves_ in three rows sometimes
slightly spirally twisted, with irregular greenish-white bands on a
dark green background; the lower leaves 8-10 cm. long, about 3·5 cm.
broad, ovate, mucronate, almost flat above, keeled beneath, rough with
small tubercles on the keel and margins; the inner leaves 14-23 cm.
long, ovate-lanceolate, mucronate, concave on the inner face, keeled
beneath, rough with small tubercles on the keel and margins.
_Inflorescence_ from the axil of one of the lower leaves; peduncle 40
cm. long, 9 mm. in diameter, terete, with about 8 barren bracts below
the flowers which occupy the uppermost 11 cm. of the peduncle. _Flowers_
at first erect, then horizontal, then pendulous when mature. _Bracts_
1·2 cm. long, 6 mm. broad, long-acuminate, acute, longer than the
pedicels, white, with a greenish-brown keel. _Pedicels_ 5 mm. long,
terete, glabrous. _Perianth-tube_ 4 cm. long, 9 mm. in diameter,
tubular, slightly ventricose and oblique at the base; lobes 9 mm. long,
5 mm. broad, obovate. _Stamens_ attached to the base of the perianth;
filaments 4·5 cm. long, terete; anthers 2·5 mm. long, oblong. _Ovary_ 6
mm. long, 3 mm. in diameter, ellipsoid; style 4 cm. long, terete; stigma
minutely 3-lobed.

The genus _Ceratotheca_, of which there are five species known, is
confined to Africa, but the species figured in the accompanying plate is
the only one recorded in South Africa. The genus is closely related to
_Sesamum_, only differing by the capsule having two divergent horns or
spines at the apex instead of being acute or beaked as in the latter
genus. The species was first described in 1842 under the name
_Sporledera triloba_, but, as pointed out in the _Botanical Magazine_
under Tab. 6974, there is no justification for establishing a genus to
include this species separate from _Ceratotheca_. The oldest record from
South Africa appears to be specimens collected by Drège between the
Umtata and St. John’s River, but since then it has been found by
numerous collectors. When fresh, the leaves have a very objectionable
odour. The plant is very common during January on the hills at
Wonderboom, near Pretoria. Our specimen was collected by Dr. R. Reitz.
Specimens are preserved in the National Herbarium, Pretoria (No. 1605).

DESCRIPTION:--An herbaceous plant with erect stems, sometimes 6 ft.
high, simple or branched. _Stems_ obtusely 4-angled, glandular-pilose.
_Leaves_ opposite, sometimes alternate, petiolate; petioles 0·5-5 cm.
long, grooved above, convex beneath, glandular-pilose; lamina 2-6·5 cm.
long, ovate, more or less 3-lobed with the lobes crenate (the uppermost
leaves not lobed), cordate at the base, palmately veined, with the veins
prominent beneath, depressed above, glandular-pubescent. _Flowers_
solitary, axillary, with often two abortive flowers in the same
leaf-axil. _Pedicels_ 5 mm. long, terete, glandular-pilose. _Calyx_
divided almost to the base; the lobes erect, 0·8-1 cm. long, lanceolate,
acuminate, sub-obtuse, glandular-pilose; the anterior lobe the smallest.
_Corolla-tube_ 3·5 cm. long, ventricose at the base, then slightly
constricted and widening into a broad campanulate portion 1·4 cm.
diameter, glandular-pilose; lobes 0·8 cm. long, about 1 cm. broad,
transversely oblong, rounded above; the posterior lobe longer. _Stamens_
of two different lengths, inserted above the ventricose portion of the
corolla-tube; filaments 0·9-1·3 cm. long, glabrous; anthers 5 mm. long,
linear. _Ovary_ 6 mm. long, oblong in outline, densely villous, with 2
divergent horns at the apex; style 1·8 cm. long, terete, glabrous;
stigmas recurved, papillose. _Fruit_ 2 cm. long, oblong, with 2
divergent horns, glandular-pilose.